Officials and others who favor stimulating growth through increased government spending ignore the CBO’s more realistic alternative scenario.
"They buttress their argument that the deficit is not an immediate problem by pointing to very low interest rates on long-term government debt, with a 2% yield on the ten-year Treasury bond and a negative real interest rate on Treasury inflation-protected bonds (TIPS)."
"But such low rates do not reflect ordinary market sentiment; rather, they stem from the fact that the Federal Reserve is now buying more long-term securities than the government is issuing to finance the budget deficit."
"Looking further ahead, the CBO warns that the combination of a rapidly aging population and the increase in medical costs will cause the deficit to rise rapidly, driven by the higher costs of pension and health-care benefits for middle-income retirees."
"According to the CBO, without legislative changes, the fiscal deficit in 2037 will be 17% of GDP, while the national debt will increase to more than 195% of GDP."
A large and rising national debt is a serious danger to an economy’s health.
"Higher debt-service costs require higher tax rates, which in turn weaken incentives and reduce economic growth."
"By the end of the decade, the US will have to pay an amount equivalent to more than one-third of the revenue from personal-income taxes just to pay the interest on the national debt."
Foreign investors now hold more than half of that debt.
Paying interest to them requires sending more goods and services to the rest of the world than the US receives from the rest of the world.
That requires a weaker dollar to make US goods more attractive to foreign buyers and to make foreign goods more expensive to American consumers.
The weaker dollar reduces the US standard of living.
"A large national debt also limits the government’s ability to respond to emergencies, including both military threats and economic downturns."
"And it makes the US vulnerable to changes in financial-market sentiment, as the European experience has shown."
Reducing future deficits and reversing the rise in the national debt require raising tax revenue and slowing the growth of government pension and health-care programs.
Tax revenue can be raised without increasing marginal tax rates by limiting the tax subsidies that are built into the current tax code.
Those subsidies are a hidden form of government spending on everything from home mortgages and health insurance to the purchase of hybrid cars and residential solar panels.
Slowing the growth of the pension and health-care programs for middle-class retirees cannot be done abruptly.
It must begin by giving notice to those who are now a decade away from retirement – which is why it is important to launch such reforms now.
"Unfortunately, the new complacency about future deficits makes it difficult, if not impossible, to enact the legislation needed to begin the process of trimming America’s long-term fiscal deficit."
It is important for policymakers and the public alike to understand the real fiscal outlook and the damage that high deficits will cause if prompt action is not taken.
Merely moving the problem to the back burner will not prevent it from boiling over.
Meeting America’s Growth Challenge
"BERKELEY – The United States continues to recover from its deepest economic slump since the Great Depression, but the pace of recovery remains frustratingly slow."
"There are several reasons to anticipate modest improvement in 2013, although, as usual, there are downside risks."
Prolonged recession or a financial crisis in Europe and slower growth in emerging markets are the main external sources of potential danger.
"At home, political infighting underlies the two greatest risks: failure to reach a deal to raise the debt ceiling and an additional round of fiscal contraction that stymies economic growth."
"Since 2010, tepid average annual GDP growth of 2.1% has meant weak job creation."
"In both this recovery and the previous two, the rebound in employment growth has been weaker and later than the rebound in GDP growth."
"But the loss of jobs in the most recent recession was more than twice as large as in previous recessions, so a slow recovery has meant a much higher unemployment rate for a much longer period."
Weak aggregate demand is the primary culprit for subdued GDP and employment growth.
The 2008 recession was triggered by a financial crisis that erupted after the collapse of a credit-fueled asset bubble decimated the housing market.
Private-sector demand contracts sharply and recovers only slowly after such crises.
"The private-sector financial balance swung from a deficit of 3.7% of GDP in 2006, at the height of the boom, to a surplus of about 6.8% of GDP in 2010 and about 5% today."
This represents the sharpest contraction and weakest recovery in private-sector demand since the end of World War II.
"Growth in two components of private demand, residential investment and consumption, which account for more than 75% of total spending in the US economy, has been especially slow."
Both sources of demand are likely to strengthen in 2013.
Residential investment is still at an historic low as a share of GDP as a result of overbuilding during the 2003-2008 housing boom and the tsunami of foreclosures that followed.
But the headwinds in the housing market are dissipating.
"Home sales, prices, and construction all rose last year, while foreclosures declined."
Residential investment should be a source of output and job growth this year.
"Large losses in household wealth, deleveraging from unsustainable debt, weak wage growth, and a decline in labor’s share of national income to a historic low have combined to constrain consumption growth."
"Real median household income is still nearly 7% below its 2007 peak, real median household net worth dropped by 35% between 2005 and 2010 (and remains significantly below its pre-recession peak), and about 90% of the income gains during the recovery have gone to the top 1%."
"To be sure, the balance-sheet headwinds holding back consumption have eased."
"Households have slashed their debt – often through painful foreclosures and bankruptcies – and their debt relative to income has sunk to its 2005 level, significantly below its 2008 peak. &#160;Helped by low interest rates, debt service relative to household income has fallen back to levels not seen since the early 1980’s."
"But consumption will be hit by the expiration of the payroll tax cut, which will reduce household income by about $125 billion this year."
"Another factor holding back recovery has been weak growth in spending on goods and services by both state and local governments, and more recently by the federal government."
"Indeed, since the recession’s onset, state and local governments have cut nearly 600,000 jobs and reduced spending for infrastructure projects by 20%."
"The fiscal trends for 2013 are mixed, but negative overall."
"While state and local government cutbacks in spending and employment are ending as the recovery boosts their tax revenues, the fiscal drag at the federal level is strengthening."
The American Taxpayer Relief Act – the tax deal reached in early January to avoid the “fiscal cliff” – shaves about $750 billion from the deficit over the next ten years and could take a percentage point off the 2013 growth rate.
"In addition, although less widely appreciated, significant reductions in federal spending are already under way, with more likely to come."
"Spending cuts and revenue increases that have been legislated since 2011 will reduce the projected deficit by $2.4 trillion over the next decade, with three-quarters coming from spending cuts, almost exclusively in non-defense discretionary programs."
"Based on current economic assumptions, the US needs about $4 trillion in savings to stabilize the debt/GDP ratio over the next decade."
It is already three-fifths of the way there.
"The so-called sequester (the across-the-board spending cuts scheduled to begin in March), would slash another $100 billion this year and $1.2 trillion over the next decade."
"Although it could stabilize the debt/GDP ratio, the sequester would be a mistake: it fails to distinguish among spending priorities, would undermine essential programs, and would mean another significant dent in growth this year."
"Moreover, despite the warnings of deficit alarmists, the US does not face an imminent debt crisis."
"Currently, the federal debt held by the public is just over 70% of GDP, a level not seen since the early 1950’s."
"However, government debt soars by an average of 86% after severe financial crises, so the increase in the federal debt by 70% between 2008 and 2012 is not surprising."
Nor is it alarming.
"The US economy grew rapidly for several years after WWII with a higher debt/GDP ratio, and today’s ratio is lower than in all other major industrial countries (and roughly half that of Greece, analogies to which are absurd and misleading)."
"During the last two years, Washington has been obsessed with the need to cut the deficit and put the debt/GDP ratio on a “sustainable” path, even as global investors have flocked to US government debt, driving interest rates to historic lows. The considerable progress that has been made on deficit reduction over the next ten years has been overlooked."
"Also overlooked have been the immediate challenges of low growth, weak investment, and high unemployment."
It is time to refocus.
"The US needs a plan for faster growth, not more deficit reduction."
"Evsey Domar, a legendary growth economist (and one of my MIT professors) counseled that the problem of alleviating the debt burden is essentially a problem of achieving growth in national income."
We should heed his wisdom.
America’s New Progressive Era?
"NEW YORK – In 1981, US President Ronald Reagan came to office famously declaring that, “Government is not the solution to our problem."
Government is the problem.”
"Thirty-two years and four presidents later, Barack Obama’s recent inaugural address, with its ringing endorsement of a larger role for government in addressing America’s – and the world’s – most urgent challenges, looks like it may bring down the curtain on that era."
Reagan’s statement in 1981 was extraordinary.
"It signaled that America’s new president was less interested in using government to solve society’s problems than he was in cutting taxes, mainly for the benefit of the wealthy."
"More important, his presidency began a “revolution” from the political right – against the poor, the environment, and science and technology – that lasted for three decades, its tenets upheld, more or less, by all who followed him: George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and, in some respects, by Obama in his first term."
"The “Reagan Revolution” had four main components: tax cuts for the rich; spending cuts on education, infrastructure, energy, climate change, and job training; massive growth in the defense budget; and economic deregulation, including privatization of core government functions, like operating military bases and prisons."
"Billed as a “free-market” revolution, because it promised to reduce the role of government, in practice it was the beginning of an assault on the middle class and the poor by wealthy special interests."
"These special interests included Wall Street, Big Oil, the big health insurers, and arms manufacturers."
"They demanded tax cuts, and got them; they demanded a rollback of environmental protection, and got it; they demanded, and received, the right to attack unions; and they demanded lucrative government contracts, even for paramilitary operations, and got those, too."
"For more than three decades, no one really challenged the consequences of turning political power over to the highest bidders."
"In the meantime, America went from being a middle-class society to one increasingly divided between rich and poor."
CEOs who were once paid around 30 times what their average workers earned now make around 230 times that amount.
"Once a world leader in the fight against environmental degradation, America was the last major economy to acknowledge the reality of climate change."
"Financial deregulation enriched Wall Street, but ended up creating a global economic crisis through fraud, excessive risk-taking, incompetence, and insider dealing."
"Maybe, just maybe, Obama’s recent address marks not only the end of this destructive agenda, but also the start of a new era."
"Indeed, he devoted almost the entire speech to the positive role of government in providing education, fighting climate change, rebuilding infrastructure, taking care of the poor and disabled, and generally investing in the future."
It was the first inaugural address of its kind since Reagan turned America away from government in 1981.
"If Obama’s speech turns out to mark the start of a new era of progressive politics in America, it would fit a pattern explored by one of America’s great historians, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., who documented roughly 30-year intervals between periods of what he called “private interest” and “public purpose.”"
"In the late 1800’s, America had its Gilded Age, with the creation of large new industries by the era’s “robber barons” accompanied by massive inequality and corruption."
The subsequent Progressive Era was followed by a temporary return to plutocracy in the 1920’s.
"Then came the Great Depression, Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal, and another 30 years of progressive politics, from the 1930’s to the 1960’s."
The 1970’s were a transition period to the Age of Reagan – 30 years of conservative politics led by powerful corporate interests.
"It is certainly time for a rebirth of public purpose and government leadership in the US to fight climate change, help the poor, promote sustainable technologies, and modernize America’s infrastructure."
"If America realizes these bold steps through purposeful public policies, as Obama outlined, the innovative science, new technology, and powerful demonstration effects that result will benefit countries around the world."
It is certainly too early to declare a new Progressive Era in America.
"Vested interests remain powerful, certainly in Congress – and even within the White House."
"These wealthy groups and individuals gave billions of dollars to the candidates in the recent election campaign, and they expect their contributions to yield benefits."
"Moreover, 30 years of tax cutting has left the US government without the financial resources needed to carry out effective programs in key areas such as the transition to low-carbon energy."
"Still, Obama has wisely thrown down the gauntlet, calling for a new era of government activism."
"He is right to do so, because many of today’s crucial challenges – saving the planet from our own excesses; ensuring that technological advances benefit all members of society; and building the new infrastructure that we need nationally and globally for a sustainable future – demand collective solutions."
Implementation of public policy is just as important to good governance as the vision that underlies it.
"So the next task is to design wise, innovative, and cost-effective programs to address these challenges."
"Unfortunately, when it comes to bold and innovative programs to meet critical human needs, America is out of practice."
"It is time to begin anew, and Obama’s full-throated defense of a progressive vision points the US in the right direction."
Game Changers for Growth
BERKELEY – The recent G-20 meeting of finance ministers in Saint Petersburg confirmed that the debate between growth and austerity is over – at least for now.
"With protracted recession in Europe and slowdowns in emerging markets, concern about budget deficits has given way to apprehension about growth."
"In July, the International Monetary Fund revised its global growth forecast downward for the second time this year."
"Both Japan and the United States stand out as bright spots in the subdued global outlook, but for different reasons."
"In Japan, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has unleashed a combination of aggressive monetary and fiscal expansion along with promised reforms of the labor market, corporate governance, regulation, and trade."
"In response to rapid and bold stimulus measures, Japan’s economy is expected to grow at a rate of around 3% this year – one of the highest rates among advanced economies – and the Nikkei index rose 80% in the six-month period ending in May of this year."
Now Abe has signaled his intention to move forward with tough structural reforms.
"If he delivers, his policies will be game changers for Japan."
"In the US, the story is one of continued recovery as the headwinds slowing growth dissipate."
"State- and local-government budgets are improving, the housing market is strengthening, and households are deleveraging and repairing their balance sheets."
"Counterproductive and excessive fiscal austerity at the federal level has dampened growth this year, but the private sector has proved more resilient than expected."
"Under current law, fiscal contraction is slated to ease next year and monetary policy is likely to remain supportive, so most forecasters predict an acceleration of growth."
"But growth prospects could be undermined by another bruising political battle over the federal budget, resulting in deep spending cuts."
The current Republican rhetoric in the House of Representatives portends additional fiscal austerity.
"Earlier this year, the Congressional Budget Office warned that the potential US growth rate has declined as a result of years of subpar investment rates, the aging of the population, and smaller productivity gains."
"Every year of below-capacity growth means lower growth capacity in the future, owing to lost investment, erosion of worker skills and experience, and diminished risk-taking."
"Still, there are often-overlooked reasons for optimism about America’s future potential growth."
"A recent McKinsey Global Institute study identifies five mutually reinforcing “game changers” that could have a significant effect on GDP growth, productivity, and employment in the US by 2020: shale energy, big-data analytics, exports in knowledge-intensive industries, infrastructure investment, and talent development."
"Two of these – shale energy and big-data analytics – build on ongoing technological breakthroughs in which the US has a strong lead and depend primarily on private-sector action, not macroeconomic or structural policies."
US production of shale gas and oil has been growing by more than 50% annually over the last five years.
"As a result of increasing supplies, US natural-gas prices have declined by two-thirds since 2008 and are likely to remain significantly lower than prices in the rest of the world at least through 2020."
"This price advantage will enhance America’s competitiveness as a manufacturing location, particularly for energy-intensive activities."
The US has the largest recoverable shale-gas reserves and the second-largest recoverable shale-oil reserves in the world.
"It also enjoys a technological lead in shale-energy technologies, and it already has a vast network of pipelines, refineries, and ports in the energy sector that can be repurposed for shale gas and oil (though much more investment will be needed)."
"Growth in shale energy will mean more investment, production, and jobs in the energy sector itself."
"Lower gas prices will boost manufacturing production, particularly in downstream industries like petrochemicals and primary metals that use natural gas as fuel and feedstock."
"Growth in energy and energy-intensive industries will fuel additional demand, output, and employment across a wide swath of supporting activities, including transportation, construction, and professional services."
"Overall, McKinsey estimates that growth in shale energy could add 2-4% to annual GDP and create up to 1.7 million jobs by 2020."
"But extracting shale energy involves environmental risks and uncertainties, among them groundwater contamination, higher methane emissions, and potential seismic effects."
"And shale gas emits CO2 when burned, even though it has half the carbon content of coal and has played a significant role in cutting US carbon emissions to mid-1990’s levels. &#160;"
"Not surprisingly, the President of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an admired environmental group, recently remarked that “fracking is about the most complicated thing I have encountered.”"
"More research on the environmental risks and benefits of shale energy, and the development of new standards and regulations to control these risks are required."
Big data and advanced analytics are another technology-driven game changer for US growth.
"As more data are generated, stored, and transmitted in digital form, new data sets relevant to personal and business decisions are growing exponentially."
"As a result of advances in computing power, the advent of cloud computing, and new software tools, more of these data sets can be quickly analyzed and used by businesses to reduce costs, boost productivity, and create new products and services."
"Big data and advanced analytics can also reduce costs and enhance efficiency in health care and government, and can create value for consumers through greater product variety and quality, as well as enhanced convenience – benefits that are not captured in GDP statistics."
"McKinsey estimates that big-data analytics could add about $325 billion, or 1.7% to annual GDP in the retail and manufacturing sectors, while generating up to $285 billion in productivity gains and cost savings in health care and government by 2020."
The potential savings in health-care costs would ease pressures on government budgets and release resources to boost growth in the rest of the economy.
New information and communications technologies were game changers that boosted the potential growth rate of the US economy in the 1990’s.
McKinsey’s research suggests that shale energy and big-data technologies will be game changers with similar benefits for the economy’s potential growth over the next several years.
America’s Opposing Future
"I recently learned something interesting: American international finance economists and American domestically oriented macroeconomists have very different – indeed, opposing – views of the likely consequences of America’s huge current-account deficit. International finance economists see a financial crisis as likely, followed by a painful and perhaps prolonged recession in the United States."
"Domestically oriented macroeconomists, by contrast, see a forthcoming fall in the value of the dollar not as a crisis, but as an opportunity to accelerate growth."
"Domestically oriented macroeconomists look at the situation roughly like this: at some point in the future, foreign central banks will become less willing to continue buying massive amounts of dollar-denominated securities in order to prop up the greenback."
"When they cease their large-scale dollar-purchase programs, the value of the dollar will fall – and it will fall hard."
"But, according to this view, as the dollar’s value declines, US exports will become more attractive to foreigners and American employment will rise, with labor re-allocated to the newly-vibrant export sector."
"It will be like what happened in Britain after it abandoned its exchange-rate peg and allowed the pound to depreciate relative to the Deutschmark , or what happened in the US in the late 1980’s, when the dollar depreciated against the pound, the Deutschmark , and – most importantly – the Japanese yen."
International finance economists see a far bleaker future.
"They see the end of large-scale dollar-purchase programs by central banks leading not only to a decline in the dollar, but also to a spike in US long-term interest rates, which will curb consumption spending immediately and throttle investment spending after only a short lag."
"To be sure, international finance economists also see US exports benefiting as the value of the dollar declines, but the lags in demand are such that the export boost will come a year or two after the decline in consumption and investment spending."
"Eight to ten million people will have to shift employment from services and construction into exports and import-competing goods, implying that structural unemployment will rise."
"Moreover, there may be a financial panic: large financial institutions with short-term liabilities and long-term assets will have a difficult time weathering a large rise in long-term dollar-denominated interest rates."
This mismatch can cause financial stress and bankruptcy just as easily as banks’ local-currency assets and dollar liabilities caused stress and bankruptcy in the Mexican and East Asian crises of the 1990’s and in the Argentinean crisis of this decade.
"When international finance economists sketch this scenario, domestically oriented macroeconomists respond that it sounds like a case of incompetent monetary policy."
Why should the Federal Reserve allow long-term interest rates to spike just because other central banks have ceased their dollar-purchase programs?
"Should not the Fed step in and replace them with its own purchases of long-term US Treasury bonds, thereby keeping long-term interest rates at a level conducive to full employment?"
"To this, international finance economists respond that the Fed does not have the power to do so."
"When forced to choose between full employment and price stability, the international finance economists say that the Fed will choose price stability, because its institutional memory of the 1970’s, when inflation ran rampant, remains very strong."
"Therefore, since a fall in the value of the dollar raises import prices, and thus functions as a negative shock to the supply side of the economy, the Fed will have to raise, not lower, interest rates, and sell, not buy, bonds."
Serious economists whom I respect enormously find themselves taking strong positions on opposite sides of this debate.
"I’m not wise enough to say which side is right, but I certainly know which side I hope is wrong."
America’s Other 30%
NEW HAVEN – The American consumer is but a shadow of its former almighty self.
Personal consumption in the United States expanded at only a 1.5% annual rate in real (inflation-adjusted) terms in the second quarter of 2012 – and that was no aberration.
"Unfortunately, it continues a pattern of weakness that has been evident since early 2008."
"Over the last 18 quarters, annualized growth in real consumer demand has averaged a mere 0.7%, compared to a 3.6% growth trend in the decade before the crisis erupted."
Never before has the American consumer been this weak for this long.
The cause is no secret.
Consumers made huge bets on two bubbles – housing and credit.
"Reckless monetary and regulatory policies turned the humble abode into an ATM, allowing families to extract dollars from bubbles and live beyond their means."
"Both bubbles have long since burst, and US households are now dealing with post-bubble financial devastation – namely, underwater assets, record-high debt, and profound shortages of savings."
"At the same time, sharply elevated unemployment and subpar income growth have combined to tighten the noose on over-extended consumers."
"As a result, American households have hunkered down as never before."
Consumers are diverting what little income they earn away from spending toward paying down debt and rebuilding savings.
That is both logical and rational – and thus not something that the US Federal Reserve can offset with unconventional monetary easing.
"But the 70% is barely growing, and is unlikely to expand strongly at any point in the foreseeable future. That puts an enormous burden on the other 30% of the US economy to generate any sort of recovery."
"In fact, the other 30% has not done a bad job, especially considering the severe headwinds coming from consumers’ 70%."
"The 30% mainly consists of four components – capital spending by firms, net exports (exports less imports), residential construction, and government purchases."
"(Technically, the pace of inventory investment should be included, but this is a cyclical buffer between production and sales rather than a source of final demand.)"
"Given the 0.7% trend in real consumption growth over the past four and a half years, the US economy’s anemic 2.2% annualized recovery in the aftermath of the Great Recession is almost miraculous."
"Credit that mainly to the other 30%, especially to strong exports and a rebound in business capital spending."
"By contrast, the government sector has been moving in the opposite direction, as state and local governments retrench and federal purchases top out after post-crisis deficit explosions."
"The housing sector has started to recover over the past five quarters, but from such a severely depressed level that its growth has had little impact on the overall economy."
"Given the strong likelihood that consumers will remain weak for years to come, America’s growth agenda needs to focus on getting more out of the other 30%."
"Of the four growth components that fall into this category, two have the greatest potential to make a difference – capital spending and exports."
"Prospects for these two sources of growth will not only influence the vigor, or lack thereof, of any recovery; they could well be decisive in bringing about an important shift in the US growth model. The 70/30 split underscores the challenge: the US must face up to a fundamental rebalancing – weaning itself from excessive reliance on internal demand and drawing greater support from external demand."
"Capital spending and exports, which together account for about 24% of GDP, hold the key to this shift."
"At just over 10% of GDP, the share of capital spending is well below the peak of nearly 13% in 2000. But capital spending must exceed that peak if US businesses are to be equipped with state-of-the-art capacity, technology, and private infrastructure that will enable them to recapture market share at home and abroad."
"Only then could export growth, impressive since mid-2009, sustain further increases. And only then could the US stem the rising tide of import penetration by foreign producers."
The other 30% is also emblematic of a deeper strategic issue that America faces – a profound competitive challenge.
A shift to external demand is not there for the asking.
"It must be earned by hard work, sheer determination, and a long overdue competitive revival."
"On that front, too, America has been falling behind."
"According to the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index, the US slipped to fifth place in 2011-2012, from fourth place the previous year, continuing a general downward trend evident since 2005."
"The erosion is traceable to several factors, including deficiencies in primary and secondary education as well as poor macroeconomic management. But the US also has disturbingly low rankings in the quality of its infrastructure (#24), technology availability and absorption (#18), and the sophistication and breadth of its supply-chain production processes (#14)."
Improvement on all counts is vital for America’s competitive revival. But meeting the challenge will require vigorous growth from America’s other 30% – especially private capital spending.
"With the American consumer likely to remain on ice, the same 30% must also continue to shoulder the burden of a sluggish economic recovery."
None of this can occur in a vacuum.
The investment required for competitive revival and sustained recovery cannot be funded without a long-overdue improvement in US saving.
The American Consumer is Not Okay
NEW HAVEN – The spin-doctors are hard at work talking up America’s subpar economic recovery.
All eyes are on households.
"Thanks to falling unemployment, rising home values, and record stock prices, an emerging consensus of forecasters, market participants, and policymakers has now concluded that the American consumer is finally back."
Don’t believe it.
"First, consider the facts: Over the 21 quarters since the beginning of 2008, real (inflation-adjusted) personal consumption has risen at an average annual rate of just 0.9%."
That is by far the most protracted period of weakness in real US consumer demand since the end of World War II – and a massive slowdown from the pre-crisis pace of 3.6% annual real consumption growth from 1996 to 2007.
"With household consumption accounting for about 70% of the US economy, that 2.7-percentage-point gap between pre-crisis and post-crisis trends has been enough to knock 1.9 percentage points off the post-crisis trend in real GDP growth."
Look no further for the cause of unacceptably high US unemployment.
"To appreciate fully the unique character of this consumer-demand shortfall, trends over the past 21 quarters need to be broken down into two distinct sub-periods."
"First, there was a 2.2% annualized decline from the first quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2009."
"This was crisis-driven carnage, highlighted by a 4.5% annualized collapse in the final two quarters of 2008."
"Second, this six-quarter plunge was followed, from mid-2009 through early 2013, by 15 quarters of annualized consumption growth averaging just 2% – an upturn that pales in comparison with what would have been expected based on past consumer-spending cycles."
That key point appears all but lost on the consumer-recovery crowd.
"In recent speeches and discussions with current and former central bankers, I have been criticized for focusing too much on the 0.9% trend of the past 21 quarters and paying too little attention to the 2% recovery phase of the post-crisis period."
"At least it’s a recovery, they claim, and a sign of healing that can be attributed mainly to the heroic, unconventional efforts of the US Federal Reserve."
This brings us to the second part of the argument against optimism: analytics.
One of the first concepts to which an economics student is exposed in a basic macro course is “pent-up” consumer demand.
"Discretionary consumption is typically deferred during recessions, especially for long-lasting durable goods such as motor vehicles, furniture, and appliances."
"Once the recession ends and recovery begins, a “stock-adjustment” response takes hold, as households compensate for foregone replacement and update their aging durable goods."
"Over most of the postwar period, this post-recession release of pent-up consumer demand has been a powerful source of support for economic recovery."
"In the eight recoveries since the early 1950’s (excluding the brief pop following the credit-controls-induced slump in the 1980’s), the stock-adjustment response lifted real consumption growth by 6.1%, on average, for five quarters following business-cycle downturns; spurts of 7-8% growth were not uncommon for a quarter or two."
"By contrast, the release of pent-up demand in the current cycle amounted to just 3% annualized growth in the five quarters from early 2010 to early 2011."
"Moreover, the strongest quarterly gain was a 4.1% increase in the fourth quarter of 2010."
This is a stunning result.
"The worst consumer recession in modern history, featuring a record collapse in durable-goods expenditures in 2008-2009, should have triggered an outsize surge of pent-up demand."
Yet it did anything but that.
"Instead, the release of pent-up consumer demand was literally half that of previous business cycles."
The third point is more diagnostic: The shockingly anemic pattern of post-crisis US consumer demand has resulted from a deep Japan-like balance-sheet recession.
"With the benefit of hindsight, we now know that the 12-year pre-crisis US consumer-spending binge was built on a precarious foundation of asset and credit bubbles."
"When those bubbles burst, consumers were left with a massive overhang of excess debt and subpar saving."
"The post-bubble aversion to spending, and the related focus on balance-sheet repair, reflects what Nomura Research Institute economist Richard Koo has called a powerful “debt rejection” syndrome."
"While Koo applied this framework to Japanese firms in Japan’s first lost decade of the 1990’s, it rings true for America’s crisis-battered consumers, who are still struggling with the lingering pressures of excessive debt loads, underwater mortgages, and woefully inadequate personal saving."
"Through its unconventional monetary easing, the Fed is attempting to create a shortcut around the imperative of household sector balance-sheet repair."
This is where the wealth effects of now-rebounding housing prices and a surging stock market come into play.
But are these newfound wealth effects really all that they are made out to be?
"Yes, the stock market is now at an all-time high – but only in current dollars."
"In real terms, the S&amp;P 500 is still 20% below its January 2000 peak."
"Similarly, while the Case-Shiller index of US home prices is now up 10.2% over the year ending March 2013, it remains 28% below its 2006 peak."
"Wealth creation matters, but not until it recoups the wealth destruction that preceded it."
"Sadly, most American households are still far from recovery on the asset side of their balance sheets."
"Moreover, though the US unemployment rate has fallen, this largely reflects an alarming decline in labor-force participation, with more than 6.5 million Americans since 2006 having given up looking for work."
"At the same time, while consumer confidence is on the mend, it remains well below pre-crisis readings."
"In short, the American consumer’s nightmare is far from over."
"Spin and frothy markets aside, the healing has only just begun."
America’s Political Recession
BERKELEY – The odds are now about 36% that the United States will be in a recession next year.
"The reason is entirely political: partisan polarization has reached levels never before seen, threatening to send the US economy tumbling over the “fiscal cliff” – the automatic tax increases and spending cuts that will take effect at the beginning of 2013 unless Democrats and Republicans agree otherwise."
"More than a century ago, during the first Gilded Age, American politics was sharply polarized as well."
"In 1896, future President Theodore Roosevelt was a Republican attack dog."
"He denounced Democratic presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan as a mere puppet of the sinister governor of Illinois, John Peter Altgeld."
"Bryan, Roosevelt said, “would be as clay in the hands of the potter under the astute control of the ambitious and unscrupulous Illinois communist.”"
The “free coinage of silver” would be “but a step towards the general socialism which is the fundamental doctrine of his political belief.”
He and Altgeld “seek to overturn the...essential policies which have controlled the government since its foundation.”
"Such language is as extreme as any we hear today – and from a man who was shortly to become Vice President (and later President, following the assassination of William McKinley)."
"We have heard Texas Governor Rick Perry call obliquely for the lynching of his fellow Republican, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, should he come to the Lone Star State. And we have seen Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach explore the possibility of removing President Barack Obama from the ballot in Kansas, because, Kobach suggested, Obama is “not a natural-born citizen.”"
"But neither Perry nor Kobach is likely ever to be a US president, whereas Theodore Roosevelt was more than a partisan."
"He was happy to make deals with Democrats – to put himself at the head not just of the Republican Party but of the bipartisan Progressive coalition, trying either to yoke the two forces together or to tack back and forth between them to achieve legislative and policy goals."
"Obama broadly follows Ronald Reagan’s (second-term) security policy, George H.W. Bush’s spending policy, Bill Clinton’s tax policy, the bipartisan Squam Lake Group’s financial-regulatory policy, Perry’s immigration policy, John McCain’s climate-change policy, and Mitt Romney’s health-care policy (at least when Romney was governor of Massachusetts). And yet he has gotten next to no Republicans to support their own policies."
"Indeed, like Clinton before him, Obama has been unable to get Republican senators like Susan Collins to vote for her own campaign-finance policies, McCain to vote for his own climate-change policy, and – most laughably – Romney to support his own health-care plan."
"Likewise, he has been unable to get Republican Vice-Presidential candidate Paul Ryan to endorse his own Medicare cost-control proposals."
There are obvious reasons for this.
"A large chunk of the Republican base, including many of the party’s largest donors, believes that any Democratic president is an illegitimate enemy of America, so that whatever such an incumbent proposes must be wrong and thus should be thwarted."
And the Republican cadres believe this of Obama even more than they believed it of Clinton.
"This view clearly influences Republican office-holders, who fear the partisan beast that mans their campaigns’ phone banks and holds the purse strings."
"Moreover, ever since Clinton’s election in 1992, those at the head of the Republican Party have believed that creating gridlock whenever a Democrat is in the White House, and thus demonstrating the government’s incapacity to act, is their best path to electoral success."
"That was the Republicans’ calculation in 2011-2012. And November’s election did not change the balance of power anywhere in the American government: Obama remains President, the Republicans remain in control of the House of Representatives, and the Democrats control the Senate."
"Now, it is possible that Republican legislators may rebel against their leaders, arguing that they ran for office to govern, not to paralyze the government in the hope that doing so will give the party power to reign as it wishes after the next election."
It is possible that Republican leaders like Representatives John Boehner and Eric Cantor and Senator Mitch McConnell will conclude that their policy of obstruction has been a failure.
"They might note that, although the economy remains deeply troubled and depressed in the aftermath of a financial crisis for which they set the stage, Obama’s policies have been by far the most successful of those in any major advanced country, and conclude that he has been a relatively good president, and one worth supporting."
But don’t count on it.
"Right now, every senior politician in America is telling their favorites in the press that they are confident that compromise on the “fiscal cliff” will be reached before the end of December. But they are telling their favorites this because they think that pessimism now will lead to their being blamed for gridlock later."
"It seems to me that the odds are around 60% that real negotiation will not begin until tax rates go up on January 1. And it seems to me that, if gridlock continues into 2013, the odds are 60% that it will tip the US back into recession."
Let us hope that it will be short and shallow.
"Bye-Bye, Middle East?"
"PARIS – For some time now, a certain strategic vision has been gaining traction: the United States is becoming energy-independent, paving the way for its political retreat from the Middle East and justifying its strategic “pivot” toward Asia."
"This view seems intuitively correct, but is it?"
Energy-hungry America has long depended on the global market to meet domestic demand.
"In 2005, the US imported 60% of the energy that it consumed."
"Since then, however, the share of imports has decreased, and it should continue to do so."
"The US is expected to become energy self-sufficient in 2020, and to become an oil exporter by 2030."
This scenario would grant the US three enormous advantages.
"It would enhance US economic competitiveness, especially relative to Europe, given the lower costs involved in the extraction of shale gas."
It would also reduce America’s exposure to growing unrest in the Arab world.
"Finally, it would increase the relative vulnerability of America’s main strategic rival, China, which is becoming increasingly dependent on Middle East energy supplies."
"These facts obviously need to be taken seriously, but their implications for US foreign policy in the Middle East should not be too hastily drawn."
"Above all, though energy dependence is a key element of US policy in the region, it is far from being the only factor."
Israel’s security and the desire to contain Iran are equally important.
"Moreover, the Middle East’s role in the global geopolitics of energy will grow in the coming decades, making it difficult to see how a superpower like the US could simply walk away from the region."
"Within the next 15 years, OPEC countries will account for 50% of global oil production, compared to only 42% today."
"Furthermore, the country on which this increase will most likely hinge is Iraq."
"Could the US ignore a country that in roughly ten years will become the world’s second-largest oil exporter, generating more than $200 billion annually in revenue, while increasingly being dominated by an authoritarian Shia regime that is close to Iran?"
"Would it withdraw in the face of the consequent strategic threat to its three allies – Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Israel – in the region?"
Such a possibility seems even more far-fetched as long as the Iranian nuclear crisis remains unresolved and the Syrian crisis continues to widen the region’s Shia-Sunni divide (reflected in increased tension between Turkey and Iran).
Even as US President Barack Obama was visiting Asia in November – a trip meant to underscore America’s “pivot” – he was forced to devote considerable time and attention to mediating a cease-fire between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.
"Indeed, if oil were truly America’s only or paramount interest in the Middle East, its special relationship with Israel would be mystifying, given the harm that it implies for US interests among Arab oil exporters."
"Even when its energy dependence on the Middle East was at its peak, the US rarely altered its policy of support for Israel."
"It is also important to bear in mind that in 1973, the US suffered less from the OPEC oil embargo than Europe did, even though America, which had resupplied Israel in its war with Egypt and Syria in October of that year, was the primary target."
"In the end, America’s position in the region strengthened after Egypt became a US ally and made peace with Israel."
China’s growing interest in the Middle East also decreases the likelihood of an American withdrawal.
"The US will remain concerned about ensuring the security of energy supplies for its Asian allies, which, like China, are increasingly dependent on the region’s oil exporters."
"Nevertheless, while an American withdrawal from the Middle East seems highly unlikely, US exposure to the region will indeed decline; as that happens, America’s role there will probably become more subdued – and perhaps more cynical."
Its involvement in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will likely be limited to maintaining the status quo rather than seeking a comprehensive settlement.
This stance – suggested by America’s opposition to granting Palestine observer-state status at the United Nations – would amount to an admission by the US that it has given up on the creation of two states in the Middle East.
That would certainly satisfy Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and the Palestinian fringe seeking to weaken the Palestinian Authority.
But it would fully vindicate those who believe that Obama is more a man of good will than a visionary.
America’s Perpetual Christma
Has the United States transcended the laws of economics?
"As the New Year begins, the US continues to race ahead of its rich-country counterparts."
The gargantuan US trade deficit?
No problem.
"In 2005, it widened further, and the dollar only strengthened."
Low investment and a deteriorating primary education system?
Not to worry.
The super-flexible US economy keeps managing to produce more with less.
Nor are there any signs of America’s economic hegemony starting to fold under the weight of maintaining its unilateral military dominance.
"Instead of feeling the pinch of wartime privations, like in any ordinary country, American consumers are binging as if it were Christmas all year round."
There are those who truly believe in the idea that America is exceptional.
Those true believers argue that America’s consumers can long pursue their spendthrift ways because their country’s economy is better than everyone else’s.
"The US labor market is more flexible than Europe’s, enabling it to react more nimbly to the ever shifting sands of globalization."
"And, unlike most countries, especially in Latin America and Asia, the US system ruthlessly prunes weak corporate leadership."
"Moreover, the true believers cite America’s better-funded and hyper-competitive university system, which sucks in a disproportionate share of the world’s top students and researchers."
"Many ultimately choose to immigrate to America permanently, and it is relatively easy for them to do so, thanks to a society that still welcomes outsiders with open arms (even if things have become more difficult since 2001)."
"On top of all this, the US military, rather than being a burden, feeds the country’s technological superiority by subsidizing basic research."
"By contrast, skeptics hold that the US economy already contains the seeds of its own socio-economic decline."
"They point to worsening income inequality, as images beamed worldwide from post-hurricane New Orleans illustrated all too clearly."
Poor children do not have reasonable access to health care.
"Nor are the non-poor faring particularly well, as wage growth has remained virtually flat for a very long time, even as corporate profits are booming."
"Indeed, this disconnect may explain why polls do not give President Bush the credit for economic management that his strong record would seem to merit."
"Nor does it help Americans’ mood that they spend far more of their lives working than do citizens in Europe or, these days, even Japan."
"All of these factors place deep stresses on the social fabric which, so the skeptics argue, will ultimately play out in the political arena."
"Interestingly, both sides cite America’s gaping trade deficit – believe it or not, the US is soaking up two-thirds of global excess saving – to support their arguments."
The true believers view the deficits as evidence that the world recognizes how special the US is and wants to buy in.
Skeptics see an empire living on borrowed money and borrowed time.
So which is it?
"In my view, those who think that America is about to collapse are likely to be disappointed."
"Nevertheless, I suspect that the age of American exceptionalism is near an end, and soon per capita income in Europe and Japan will approach that of the US, rather than falling farther behind."
"Though the next few years are likely to underscore some of the weaknesses that the skeptics highlight, the end will come mainly because other countries will find creative ways to mimic the most effective US institutions, albeit within their own legal, political, and social frameworks."
"We would do well to recall how, at the beginning of the 1990’s, book after book was still being written urging US and European corporations to imitate Japan or face certain doom."
The last 15 years have of course revealed deep flaws in Japan’s financial system.
"But another major factor contributing to Japan’s decline was that firms elsewhere began adopting Japanese methods, such as just-in-time supply chains."
"Surely, imitation will someday impinge on superior US growth performance as well."
Perhaps the biggest weakness in the true believers’ argument is the trade deficit.
"For the moment, America’s ability to borrow vast sums at low interest rates acts like a huge dose of steroids on the economy."
It artificially props up consumption growth and allows the government to defer hard choices between taxes and military expenditures.
"At some point, the party is going to end."
"The unwinding of the US economy might even begin in 2006, particularly if Japan continues to grow out of its doldrums, the US housing market softens dramatically, and Europe’s economic recovery accelerates."
"Individually, these are each highly plausible scenarios, and collectively they would hit the US trade deficit like a perfect storm."
"Perhaps the end will come in a different way, but it is difficult to imagine the age of US exceptionalism lasting indefinitely."
Can the end come abruptly in 2006?
"This is not the most likely scenario, but it is not unthinkable."
America’s Strategy Vacuum
"NEW HAVEN – Apparently, policymakers at the Federal Reserve are having second thoughts about the wisdom of open-ended quantitative easing (QE)."
They should.
Not only has this untested policy experiment failed to deliver an acceptable economic recovery; it has also heightened the risk of another crisis.
The minutes of the January 29-30 meeting of the Fed’s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) speak to a simmering discontent: “[M]any participants…expressed some concerns about potential costs and risks arising from further asset purchases.”
"The concerns range from worries about the destabilizing ramifications of an exit strategy from QE to apprehension about capital losses on the Fed’s rapidly ballooning portfolio of securities (currently $3 trillion, and on its way to $4 trillion by the end of this year)."
"As serious as these concerns may be, they overlook what could well be the greatest flaw in the Fed’s unprecedented gambit: an emphasis on short-term tactics over longer-term strategy."
"Blindsided by the crisis of 2007-2008, the Fed has compounded its original misdiagnosis of the problem by repeatedly doubling down on tactical responses, with two rounds of QE preceding the current, open-ended iteration."
"The FOMC, drawing a false sense of comfort from the success of QE1 – a massive liquidity injection in the depths of a horrific crisis – mistakenly came to believe that it had found the right template for subsequent policy actions."
That approach might have worked had the US economy been afflicted by a cyclical disease – a temporary shortfall of aggregate demand.
"In that case, countercyclical policies – both fiscal and monetary – could eventually be expected to plug the demand hole and get the economy going again, just as Keynesians argue."
"But the US is not suffering from a temporary, cyclical malady."
"It is afflicted by a very different disease: a protracted balance-sheet recession that continues to hobble American households, whose consumption accounts for roughly 70% of GDP."
"Two bubbles – property and credit – against which American families borrowed freely, have long since burst."
"But the aftershocks linger: Household-debt loads were still at 113% of disposable personal income in 2012 (versus 75% in the final three decades of the twentieth century), and the personal-saving rate averaged just 3.9% last year (compared to 7.9% from 1970 to 1999)."
"Understandably fixated on balance-sheet repair, US consumers have not taken the bait from their monetary and fiscal authorities."
"Instead, they have cut back on spending."
Gains in inflation-adjusted personal-consumption expenditure have averaged a mere 0.8% over the past five years – the most severe and protracted slowdown in consumer demand growth in the post-World War II era.
The brute force of massive monetary and fiscal stimulus rings hollow as a cyclical remedy to this problem.
Another approach is needed.
"The focus, instead, should be on accelerating the process of balance-sheet repair, while at the same time returning monetary and fiscal policy levers to more normal settings."
"Forgiveness of “underwater” mortgages (where the outstanding loan exceeds the home’s current market value), as well as reducing the foreclosure overhang of some 1.5 million homes, must be part of that solution."
How else can the crisis-battered housing market finally clear for the remainder of US homeowners?
"The same can be said for enhanced saving incentives, which would contribute to longer-term financial security for American households, most of which suffered massive wealth losses in the Great Recession."
"Expanded individual retirement accounts and 401K pension schemes, special incentives for low-income households (most of which have no retirement plans), and an end to the financial repression that the Fed’s zero-interest-rate policy imposes on savers must also be part of the solution."
"Yes, these are controversial policies."
Debt forgiveness raises thorny ethical concerns about condoning reckless and irresponsible behavior.
"But converting underwater “non-recourse” mortgage loans, where only the house is at risk, into so-called “recourse liabilities,” for which nonpayment would have consequences for all of a borrower’s assets, could address this concern, while simultaneously tempering America’s culture of leverage with a much greater sense of responsibility."
"Timing is also an issue, especially with respect to saving incentives."
"To avoid the shortfall in aggregate demand that might arise from an abrupt surge in saving, these measures should be phased in over a period of 3-5 years."
The main benefit of these proposals is that they are more strategic than tactical – better aligned with the balance-sheet problems that are actually afflicting the economy.
"As the quintessential laissez-faire system, the US has outsourced strategy to the invisible hand of the market for far too long."
That has left the government locked into a reactive and often misguided approach to unexpected problems.
"Thus, the Fed is focused on cleaning up after a crisis rather than on how to avoid another one."
"The same is true of US fiscal policy, with an event-driven debate that now has ever-shorter time horizons: the fiscal cliff on January 1, sequestration of expenditures on March 1, expiration of the continuing budget resolution on March 27, and the new May 18 debt-ceiling limit."
"A compliant bond market, which may well be the next bubble, is mistakenly viewed as the ultimate validation of this myopic approach."
The dangers of America’s strategy vacuum and the related penchant for short-termism have been mounting for some time.
Harvard Business School professor Michael Porter famously raised this concern in a 1996 article in the Harvard Business Review.
"His focus was on corporate decision-making and misaligned incentives leading to a worrisome dichotomy between the short-term tactics of “operational effectiveness” (cost cutting, outsourcing, and reengineering) and the long-term visionary bets that frame successful strategies."
"While Porter’s critique was directed at business managers, it bears critically on the current US policy debate."
A successful long-term strategy cannot be seen as a succession of short-term fixes.
The internal debate in the FOMC represents a healthy and long-overdue recognition that the central bank may be digging itself into an ever-deeper hole by committing to misguided policies aimed at the wrong problem.
A comparable debate is raging over fiscal policy.
Can America finally face up to the perils of its strategy vacuum?
America’s Political Class Struggle
NEW YORK – America is on a collision course with itself.
This month’s deal between President Barack Obama and the Republicans in Congress to extend the tax cuts initiated a decade ago by President George W. Bush is being hailed as the start of a new bipartisan consensus.
"I believe, instead, that it is a false truce in what will become a pitched battle for the soul of American politics."
"As in many countries, conflicts over public morality and national strategy come down to questions of money."
"In the United States, this is truer than ever."
"The US is running an annual budget deficit of around $1 trillion, which may widen further as a result of the new tax agreement."
This level of annual borrowing is far too high for comfort.
"It must be cut, but how?"
The problem is America’s corrupted politics and loss of civic morality.
"One political party, the Republicans, stands for little except tax cuts, which they place above any other goal."
"The Democrats have a bit wider set of interests, including support for health care, education, training, and infrastructure."
"But, like the Republicans, the Democrats, too, are keen to shower tax cuts on their major campaign contributors, predominantly rich Americans."
The result is a dangerous paradox.
The US budget deficit is enormous and unsustainable.
The poor are squeezed by cuts in social programs and a weak job market.
One in eight Americans depends on Food Stamps to eat.
"Yet, despite these circumstances, one political party wants to gut tax revenues altogether, and the other is easily dragged along, against its better instincts, out of concern for keeping its rich contributors happy."
"This tax-cutting frenzy comes, incredibly, after three decades of elite fiscal rule in the US that has favored the rich and powerful."
"Since Ronald Reagan became President in 1981, America’s budget system has been geared to supporting the accumulation of vast wealth at the top of the income distribution."
"Amazingly, the richest 1% of American households now has a higher net worth than the bottom 90%."
"The annual income of the richest 12,000 households is greater than that of the poorest 24 million households."
The Republican Party’s real game is to try to lock that income and wealth advantage into place.
"They fear, rightly, that sooner or later everyone else will begin demanding that the budget deficit be closed in part by raising taxes on the rich."
"After all, the rich are living better than ever, while the rest of American society is suffering."
It makes sense to tax them more.
The Republicans are out to prevent that by any means.
"This month, they succeeded, at least for now."
But they want to follow up their tactical victory – which postpones the restoration of pre-Bush tax rates for a couple of years – with a longer-term victory next spring.
Their leaders in Congress are already declaring that they will slash public spending in order to begin reducing the deficit.
"Ironically, there is one area in which large budget cuts are certainly warranted: the military."
But that is the one item most Republicans won’t touch.
"They want to slash the budget not by ending the useless war in Afghanistan, and by eliminating unnecessary weapons systems, but by cutting education, health, and other benefits for the poor and working class."
"In the end, I don’t think they will succeed."
"For the moment, most Americans seem to be going along with Republican arguments that it is better to close the budget deficit through spending cuts rather than tax increases."
"Yet when the actual budget proposals are made, there will be a growing backlash."
"With their backs against the wall, I predict, poor and working-class Americans will begin to agitate for social justice."
This may take time.
The level of political corruption in America is staggering.
"Everything now is about money to run electoral campaigns, which have become incredibly expensive."
"The mid-term elections cost an estimated $4.5 billion, with most of the contributions coming from big corporations and rich contributors."
"These powerful forces, many of which operate anonymously under US law, are working relentlessly to defend those at the top of the income distribution."
But make no mistake: both parties are implicated.
There is already talk that Obama will raise $1 billion or more for his re-election campaign.
That sum will not come from the poor.
"The problem for the rich is that, other than military spending, there is no place to cut the budget other than in areas of core support for the poor and working class."
Is America really going to cut health benefits and retirement income? Will it really balance the budget by slashing education spending at a time when US students already are being out-performed by their Asian counterparts?
Will America really let its public infrastructure continue to deteriorate?
"The rich will try to push such an agenda, but ultimately they will fail."
Obama swept to power on the promise of change.
So far there has been none.
His administration is filled with Wall Street bankers.
"His top officials leave to join the banks, as his budget director Peter Orszag recently did."
"He is always ready to serve the interests of the rich and powerful, with no line in the sand, no limit to “compromise.”"
"If this continues, a third party will emerge, committed to cleaning up American politics and restoring a measure of decency and fairness."
"This, too, will take time."
The political system is deeply skewed against challenges to the two incumbent parties.
Yet the time for change will come.
The Republicans believe that they have the upper hand and can pervert the system further in favor of the rich.
I believe that they will be proved wrong.
America\u0027s Problems Run Deeper than Wall Street
"CAMBRIDGE – With less than two months remaining before America’s presidential election, much attention is focused on the state of the American economy and the challenges that it will present to the next president."
We are in the midst of a financial crisis caused by the serious mispricing of all kinds of risks and by the collapse of the housing bubble that developed in the first half of this decade.
"What started as a problem with sub-prime mortgages has now spread to houses more generally, as well as to other asset classes."
"The housing problem is contributing to the financial crisis, which in turn is reducing the supply of credit needed to sustain economic activity."
"Indeed, the financial crisis has worsened in recent weeks, reflected in the US Federal Reserve’s takeover of quasi-government mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac – which may cost American taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars – as well as the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the sale of Merrill Lynch."
"Ultimately, these financial failures reflect the downward spiral of house prices and the increasing number of homes with negative equity, i.e., with substantial mortgage debt in excess of market values."
Negative equity is significant because mortgages in the United States are generally “no recourse” loans.
"If a homeowner defaults, creditors can take the house, but they cannot take other property or income to make up any unpaid balance."
"Even in those states where mortgages are not “no recourse” loans, creditors generally do not pursue the assets or income of individuals who default."
We cannot be sure about how much further house prices will fall.
Experts say another 15% decline is required just to return to the pre-bubble price path. But there is nothing to stop the decline from continuing once it reaches that point.
The growing gap between mortgage debts and house prices will continue to increase the rate of defaults.
"Many homeowners who can afford to make their mortgage payments will choose to default, move to rental housing, and wait to purchase until house prices have declined further."
"As homeowners with large negative equity default, the foreclosed homes contribute to the excess supply that drives prices down further."
And the lower prices lead to more negative equity and therefore to more defaults and foreclosures.
It is not clear what will stop this self-reinforcing process.
"Declining house prices are key to the financial crisis and the outlook for the economy, because mortgage-backed securities, and the derivatives based on them, are the primary assets that are weakening financial institutions."
"Until house prices stabilize, these securities cannot be valued with any confidence. And that means that the financial institutions that own them cannot have confidence in the liquidity or solvency of potential counterparties – or even in the value of their own capital."
"Without this confidence, credit will not flow and economic activity will be constrained."
"Moreover, because financial institutions’ assets were bought mainly with borrowed money, the shortage of credit is exacerbated by their need to deleverage."
"Since raising capital is difficult and costly, they deleverage by lending less."
But the macroeconomic weakness in the US now goes beyond the decreased supply of credit. Falling house prices reduce household wealth and therefore consumer spending.
Falling employment lowers wage and salary incomes.
The higher prices of food and energy depress real incomes further. And declining economic activity in the rest of the world is lowering demand for US exports.
"The US Federal Reserve has, in my judgment, responded appropriately by reducing the federal funds interest rate sharply and creating a variety of new credit facilities."
"The low interest rate helped by making the dollar more competitive, but otherwise monetary policy appears to have lost traction because of the condition of the housing sector and the dysfunctional state of the credit markets."
The US Congress and the Bush administration enacted a $100 billion tax rebate in an attempt to stimulate consumer spending.
"Those of us who supported this policy generally knew that history and economic theory implied that such one-time fiscal transfers have little effect, but we thought that this time might be different."
"Our support was, in the words of Samuel Johnson, a triumph of hope over experience."
"In the end, our hopes were frustrated."
"The official national income accounting data for the second quarter are now available, and they show that the rebates did very little to stimulate spending."
More than 80% of the rebate dollars were saved or used to pay down debt. Very little was added to current spending.
"So that is where the US is now: in the middle of a financial crisis, with the economy sliding into recession, monetary policy already at maximum easing, and fiscal transfers impotent."
"That is an unenviable situation, to say the least, for any incoming president."
Obama’s Burmese Gamble
ARLINGTON – The rapprochement between the United States and Myanmar (Burma) has proceeded at a blistering pace.
"A year ago, the two countries did not even have ambassadors in each other’s capitals. In May, President Thein Sein became the first leader from Myanmar to visit the White House in nearly a half-century."
"But has Barack Obama’s administration been too quick to embrace what was, until recently, one of the world’s most repressive regimes?"
"Or, on the contrary, is decisive US support essential to Myanmar’s fledgling reform process?"
"Until the recent opening, Myanmar, which gained independence in 1948, had been ruled by a secretive military junta since 1962."
"As recently as 2010, the regime held elections so blatantly rigged that the main opposition party refused to participate."
"But in 2011, shortly before assuming the presidency, Sein, a general who served as Prime Minister under the junta, began to take steps that impressed even the most skeptical observers."
"Unlike the token gestures of reform offered by previous rulers, Sein’s actions appeared substantive and meaningful."
"One important change was the release of hundreds of political prisoners, including the regime’s most prominent opponent, Aung San Suu Kyi, who had been under house arrest for nearly 15 years."
"Moreover, Sein initiated a dialogue with Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize winner and the leader of the National League for Democracy (NLD), about a transition to civilian rule."
The subsequent elections bolstered hope for Myanmar’s democratic future.
"In 1990, when the NLD won 81% of the seats in Parliament, the junta promptly voided the results and arrested Suu Kyi."
"In 2012, the NLD won 43 of the 44 seats that it contested, and the military accepted Suu Kyi as the reform movement’s legitimate leader."
"Furthermore, Sein has reached out to the Karen, Kachin, and other ethnic minorities – groups whose members have suffered decades of official persecution and mistreatment."
"And efforts to open Myanmar’s economy to international trade have transformed the country’s commercial capital, Yangon (Rangoon), with businesspeople now arriving on direct flights from at least a half-dozen foreign capitals and once-empty streets now congested with imported cars."
"But, in some areas, reform has been painfully slow."
"In fact, when it comes to human rights and minority protections, Myanmar may even be regressing."
"The liberalization process has exposed the country’s long-standing religious divisions, leading to a wave of sectarian violence aimed primarily at the minority Muslim community."
"From coastal Rakhine to inland towns like Meiktila and Tatkon, Buddhist monks have incited violence against Muslims (and sometimes vice versa), with local officials often tacitly permitting religious bloodletting."
"At his meeting with Sein in Washington, DC, Obama condemned the violence against Myanmar’s Muslims, which has displaced many of them."
"On the same day, the US State Department released its annual report on religious freedom, in which Myanmar was included among the world’s eight worst offenders."
This has not always been the case.
"Although Myanmar is an overwhelmingly Buddhist country, dozens of religious and ethnic communities have long lived there side by side."
"In the heart of Yangon, the golden dome of the Sule Pagoda stands just across the street from the minarets of the Bengali Mosque."
"In order to achieve the peace and stability needed to consolidate Myanmar’s democratic transition, both Sein and Suu Kyi should do more to establish themselves as representatives of all of Myanmar’s citizens."
Muslims need to be assured of their personal security and guaranteed full civil rights.
The Obama administration has staked significant political capital on the wager that Myanmar’s promise may finally bear fruit.
"And, indeed, the rate of change in Myanmar over the last two years has been nothing short of remarkable."
"But, as Sein acknowledged at the White House, Myanmar’s government “has been encountering obstacles and challenges along [its] democratization process.”"
How it copes with these problems – and those that have yet to arise – will determine whether America has given its blessing prematurely.
America’s Reactionary Feminist
"NEW YORK – It is obvious that the left and the media establishment in the United States cannot fully understand the popular appeal of the two Republican tigresses in the news – first Sarah Palin, and now, as she consolidates her status as a Republican presidential front-runner, Michele Bachmann."
What do they have that other candidates don’t –&#160;and that so many Americans seem to want?
Both Bachmann and Palin are regularly derided in the mainstream press.
"In Palin’s case, the dominant perception is that she is an intellectual lightweight: a clip of her unable to mention a single newspaper or news magazine that she reads regularly got millions of hits on YouTube during the last presidential election."
"Bachmann, on the other hand,&#160;is portrayed as being slightly unhinged."
"Indeed, I can attest from personal experience that to debate her is to encounter someone who is absolutely certain of facts that must exist somewhere in a parallel universe."
But it would be a mistake simply to dismiss their appeal with no effort to comprehend its source. This is especially true of Bachmann.
"Palin has not managed to secure the support and mentorship of the Republican Party establishment, and will continue to showcase her odd appeal as a media personality. But Bachman, weirdly, might become President of the United States."
The nature of their attraction has to do with two strains in American thought to which the US left and media establishment are truly blind.
"One is the American tradition of populist demagoguery – a tradition that, in the twentieth century, included the racist Father Charles Coughlin in the 1930’s, the anti-Communist witch-hunter Joe McCarthy in the 1950’s, and the radical Malcolm X in the 1960’s."
"Populist leaders inspire passionate devotion, usually in people who feel (and often are) economically, politically, and culturally marginalized."
"These populist movements’ energy can be directed for good or ill, but demagogues in America embrace similar tactics to fuel their rise to visibility and power."
They use emotive rhetoric.
"They often invent shadowy networks of “elite” forces ranged against the ordinary, decent American."
They create an “us versus them” scenario. And they ask their listeners to believe that they alone will restore American dignity and articulate the wishes of the unheard.
"Palin and Bachmann speak this highly personal or emotional language, which even the most rock-ribbed male Republican finds difficult to emulate."
"In the last three decades, America’s male-dominated politics has become increasingly wonky, abstract, and professionalized. This is bad for demagoguery, but it does not inhibit the tigresses on the right, who did not come up through the “old boy’s club.”"
"As a result, Palin is free to talk about “death panels” – a wholly invented threat of President Barack Obama’s health-care reform – and Bachmann can summon the spirit of McCarthy to raise the equally bizarre specter of socialism’s tentacles infiltrating the highest levels of government."
"Both can issue homespun appeals as “hockey moms” or “soccer moms” – precisely the type of emotionalism that more cut-and-dried professional male politicians, even (or especially) at the top of the party, cannot manage to deliver."
"The second reason that Bachmann and Palin appeal to so many Americans – and this should not be underestimated, either – has to do with a serious historical misreading of feminism."
"Because feminism in the 1960’s and 1970’s was articulated via the institutions of the left – in Britain, it was often allied with the labor movement, and in America, it was reborn in conjunction with the emergence of the New Left – there is an assumption that feminism itself must be leftist."
"In fact, feminism is philosophically as much in harmony with conservative, and especially libertarian, values – and in some ways even more so."
"The core of feminism is individual choice and freedom, and it is these strains that are being sounded now more by the Tea Party movement than by the left. But, apart from these sound bites, there is a powerful constituency of right-wing women in Britain and Western Europe, as well as in America, who do not see their values reflected in collectivist social-policy prescriptions or gender quotas."
"They prefer what they see as the rugged individualism of free-market forces, a level capitalist playing field, and a weak state that does not impinge on their personal choices."
"Many of these women are socially conservative, strongly supportive of the armed forces, and religious – and yet they crave equality as strongly as any leftist vegetarian in Birkenstocks."
"It is blindness to this perfectly legitimate approach to feminism that keeps tripping up commentators who wish to dismiss women like Margaret Thatcher, or Muslim women, or now right-wing US women leaders, as somehow not being the “real thing.”"
"But these women are real feminists – even if they do not share policy preferences with the already recognized “sisterhood,” and even if they themselves would reject the feminist label."
In the case of Palin – and especially that of Bachmann – we ignore the wide appeal of right-wing feminism at our peril.
America\u0027s Renminbi Fixation
"NEW YORK – For seven years, the United States has allowed its fixation on the renminbi’s exchange rate to deflect attention from far more important issues in its economic relationship with China."
The upcoming Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the US and China is an excellent opportunity to examine – and rethink – America’s priorities.
"Since 2005, the US Congress has repeatedly flirted with legislation aimed at defending hard-pressed American workers from the presumed threat of a cheap Chinese currency."
Bipartisan support for such a measure surfaced when Senators Charles Schumer (a liberal Democrat from New York) and Lindsey Graham (a conservative Republican from South Carolina) introduced the first Chinese currency bill.
"The argument for legislative action is tantalizingly simple: the US merchandise trade deficit has averaged a record 4.4% of GDP since 2005, with China accounting for fully 35% of the shortfall, supposedly owing to its currency manipulation."
"The Chinese, insists a broad coalition of politicians, business leaders, and academic economists, must revalue or face sanctions."
This reasoning resonates with the US public. Opinion polls conducted in 2011 found that fully 61% of Americans believes that China represents a serious economic threat.
"As such, the currency debate looms as a major issue in the upcoming US presidential campaign."
"“Enough is enough,” President Barack Obama replied, when queried on the renminbi in the aftermath of his last meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao."
"Obama’s presumptive Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, has promised to declare China guilty of currency manipulation the day he takes office."
"But, however appealing this logic may be, it is wrong."
"First, America’s trade deficit is multilateral: the US ran deficits with 88 nations in 2010."
A multilateral imbalance – especially one that it is traceable to a saving shortfall – cannot be fixed by putting pressure on a bilateral exchange rate.
"Indeed, America’s major threat is from within."
"Blaming China merely impedes the heavy lifting that must be done at home – namely, boosting saving by cutting budget deficits and encouraging households to save income rather than rely on asset bubbles."
"Second, the renminbi has now appreciated 31.4% against the dollar since mid-2005, well in excess of the 27.5% increase called for by the original Schumer-Graham bill."
"Mindful of the lessons of Japan – especially its disastrous concession on sharp yen appreciation in the Plaza Accord of 1985 – the Chinese have opted, instead, for a gradual revaluation."
"Recent moves toward renminbi internationalization, a more open capital account, and wider currency trading bands leave little doubt that the endgame is a market-based, fully convertible renminbi."
"Third, there has been significant improvement in China’s external imbalance."
"The International Monetary Fund estimates that China’s current-account surplus will narrow to just 2.3% of GDP in 2012, after peaking at 10.1% in 2007."
American officials have long bemoaned China’s saving glut as a major source of global instability.
"But they should look in the mirror: America’s current-account deficit this year, at an estimated $510 billion, is likely to be 2.8 times higher than China’s surplus."
"Finally, China has evolved from the world’s factory to its assembly line."
Research shows that no more than 20% to 30% of Chinese exports to the US reflect value added inside China.
"Roughly 60% of Chinese exports represent shipments of “foreign invested enterprises” – in effect, Chinese subsidiaries of global multinationals."
Think Apple.
"Globalized production platforms distort bilateral trade data between the US and China, and have little to do with the exchange rate."
"Rather than vilifying China as the principal economic threat to America, the relationship should be recast as an opportunity."
The largest component of US aggregate demand – the consumer – is on ice.
"With households focused on repairing severely damaged balance sheets, inflation-adjusted private consumption has expanded at an anemic 0.5% average annual rate over the past four years."
"Consumer deleveraging is likely to persist for years to come, leaving the US increasingly desperate for new sources of growth."
Exports top the list of possibilities.
China is now America’s third largest and most rapidly growing export market.
There can be no mistaking its potential to fill some of the void left by US consumers.
The key to realizing that opportunity lies in access to Chinese markets – all the more significant in light of China’s upcoming pro-consumption rebalancing.
"Historically, China has had an open development model, with imports running at 28% of GDP since 2002 – nearly three times Japan’s 10% import ratio during its high-growth era (1960-1989)."
"As a result, for a given increment of domestic demand, China is far more predisposed toward foreign sourcing."
"As the Chinese consumer emerges, demand for a wide variety of US-made goods – ranging from new-generation information technology and biotech to automotive components and aircraft – could surge."
"The same is true of services. At just 43% of GDP, China’s services sector is relatively tiny."
"There is enormous scope for America’s global services companies to expand in China, especially in transactions-intensive distribution sectors – wholesale and retail trade, domestic transportation, and supply-chain logistics – as well as in the processing segments of finance, health care, and data warehousing."
The US needs to refocus the US-China trade agenda toward expanded market access in these and other areas – pushing back against Chinese policies and government procurement practices that favor domestic production and indigenous innovation.
"Some progress has been made, but more is needed – for example, getting China to join the World Trade Organization’s Government Procurement Agreement."
"At the same time, the US should reconsider antiquated Cold War restrictions on Chinese purchases of technology-intensive items."
"For a growth-starved US, the opportunities of market access far outweigh the currency threat."
The long-dormant Chinese consumer is about to be unleashed.
This plays to one of America’s greatest strengths – its zeal to compete in new markets.
Shame on the US if it squanders this extraordinary chance by digging in its heels at the upcoming Strategic and Economic dialogue.
America\u0027s Retreat from Asia
"The United States' planned withdrawal of troops from Asia, which President George W. Bush announced on August 16, need not harm peace and stability in the region and particularly in Korea. But a key condition for a smooth redeployment of US troops is close consultations by America with its allies, something it has not done well up to now."
South Korea and Japan need to have their views taken into serious account if this now inevitable withdrawal is to succeed.
"By contrast, unilaterally announcing the withdrawal - and then unilaterally implementing it - may harm the very purpose that the remaining US troops in Asia are intended to serve: assuring deterrence, stability, and nonproliferation in Korea and Asia."
The withdrawal plan is causing countless worries.
"In Japan, there are concerns that it will make the country America's frontline command post in Asia, possibly beyond the scope of its bilateral security treaty with the US."
One result is that China feels nervous about the implications of any expansion of the American-Japanese military partnership.
But the impact of America's planned troop withdrawals is felt most keenly in South Korea.
"In June, the Bush administration revealed its plan to withdraw some 12,500 of the 37,000 US soldiers stationed in South Korea by the end of 2005."
"These include 3,600 troops from the 2nd Brigade of the 2nd Infantry Division, who are already earmarked for redeployment in Iraq."
"The US Defense Department justifies this change as part of the so-called ""Global Posture Review"" that it has been carrying out to provide more flexibility and mobility in deploying troops to more urgently needed places around the world. But the unilateral nature of the announcement, and the abrupt timing of the plan, has incited alarm in South Korea, and perhaps in Japan, that withdrawal could pose serious risks to the vital role that US forces have performed in deterring another war in Korea."
South Koreans genuinely fear that the plan may weaken deterrence by sending North Korea - which is demanding a US military withdrawal while refusing to abandon its nuclear weapons ambitions - the message that intransigence pays.
"Indeed, it should not be forgotten that North Korea maintains an army of 1.1 million troops."
"Moreover, the manner in which the Bush administration unveiled its withdrawal plan has weakened the credibility of the US-Korean alliance."
"America's unilateral announcement has fuelled rumors to the effect that withdrawal must have something to do with the rising tide of anti-Americanism in South Korea, and especially with the country's reluctance and delay in dispatching an additional 3,600 of its own soldiers to Iraq."
"The Bush administration tries to rebut these charges by saying that the plan will not weaken the deterrence capabilities of American forces, for America's far more powerful air and naval presence in the area will be maintained."
"Moreover, the US plans to strengthen South Korea's own forces by supplying some $11 billion worth of high-technology equipment over the next five years."
"Militarily, this argument does make sense."
"Politically and psychologically, however, the method, let alone the timing and implementation of the withdrawals, raises many questions about the ongoing viability of the US-Korean security alliance, for the alliance now seems adrift, without a common purpose and with little direction from either side."
"Yet the Bush administration insists: ""The US views South Korea as a strong and steadfast ally."
"We are committed to South Korea's security and to our alliance and partnership with Seoul."""
"If Washington is serious about these words, it should transform this commitment into a long-term and comprehensive alliance that can survive the current estrangement - and continue even after Korean unification - by making a joint declaration with South Korea's government at the highest level."
"In order to allay misgivings and restore trust in the alliance, it is necessary for the US and South Korea to reaffirm their common interests and values in pursuing deterrence, nonproliferation, stability, and democracy on the Korean peninsula and across Asia."
"Once they resolve to continue their alliance with these purposes in mind, it should be possible for responsible officials to work out guiding principles for concrete security cooperation."
Specific negotiations on withdrawing American troops from Korea or on redeploying them from the DMZ to south of Seoul must be carried out according to these principles.
"In so doing, America must treat South Korea as a full partner with its own voice in making decisions that affect its security interests."
"As an American ally for 51 years, and as East Asia's third-largest economy, South Korea is entitled to be fully consulted on such decisions."
"Despite anti-American sentiments among some South Koreans, a majority of the country's people wants American forces to remain as a stabilizing force."
"Securing a peaceful and nuclear-free Korean peninsula, a place where the interests of China, Japan, Russia, and America directly intersect, is one of the most important security goals anywhere on the planet."
"For this reason, America and South Korea must restore a strategic vision for the future."
America’s Saving Rate and the Dollar’s Future
"CAMBRIDGE – The saving rate of American households has risen sharply since the beginning of the year, reaching 6.9% of after-tax personal income in May, the highest rate since 1992."
"In today’s economy, that is equivalent to annual savings of $750 billion."
"While a 6.9% saving rate is not high in comparison to that of many other countries, it is a dramatic shift from the household-saving rate of less than 1% that the United States experienced in 2005, 2006, and 2007."
"Before it began rising last year, the US household saving rate had been declining for more than 20 years in response to the increasing level of household wealth."
The rising stock market and the higher value of homes induced individuals to consume more of their incomes and to save less.
"As a result, most working individuals reduced the amount that they saved for their retirement, and retirees were able to increase their spending."
The net saving rate fell to near zero.
"The sharp drop in household wealth over the past two years, however, put an end to that."
"Dramatically lower share prices and a 35% fall in home prices reduced household wealth by $14 trillion, a loss equal to 140% of annual disposable income. Individuals now have to save more to prepare for retirement, and retirees have less wealth to spend."
"Looking ahead, the saving rate may rise even further, and will, in any case, remain high for many years."
The increase in the household saving rate reduces America’s need for foreign funds to finance its business investment and residential construction.
"Taken by itself, today’s $750 billion annual rate of household saving could replace that amount in capital inflows from the rest of the world."
"Since the peak annual rate of capital inflow was $803 billion (in 2006), the increased household saving has the potential to eliminate almost all of America’s dependence on foreign capital."
The annual capital inflow is equal each year to the US current-account deficit – the sum of the trade deficit plus the net interest and dividends that America’s government and businesses owe to the rest of the world.
The fall in the capital inflow would therefore bring with it a fall in the trade deficit.
"Since reducing the trade deficit requires increasing exports and shrinking imports, the international value of the dollar must decline to make US products more attractive to foreign buyers and US goods and services more attractive to American consumers."
"Without a fall in the dollar and the resulting rise in net exports, a higher saving rate and reduced consumer spending could push the US economy into a deep recession. By contrast, the lower dollar makes reduced consumption consistent with full employment by shifting consumer spending from imports to domestic goods and services, and by supplementing this rise in domestic demand with increased exports."
"But this direct link between higher household saving and a lower dollar will only be forged if higher household saving is not outweighed by a rise in government dis-saving, i.e., by a larger government deficit. A large fiscal deficit increases the need for foreign funds to avoid crowding out private investment."
"Put differently, the value of the dollar reflects total national saving, not just savings in the household sector."
"Unfortunately, the US fiscal deficit is projected to remain high for many years."
"The Congressional Budget Office projects that the US government’s budget deficit will average 5.2% of GDP over the next decade, and be 5.5% of GDP a decade from now."
"If that high level of government borrowing occurs, it will absorb all of the available household savings even at the current elevated level."
That would mean that the US would continue to need substantial inflows of foreign capital to fund business investment and housing construction.
So the dollar would have to stay at its current level to continue to create the large trade deficit and resulting capital inflow.
"It is, of course, possible – I would say likely – that China and other foreign lenders will not be willing to continue to provide the current volume of lending to the US."
Their reduced demand for dollars will cause the dollar to decline and the trade deficit to shrink. That reduced trade deficit and the resulting decline in capital inflows will lead to higher real interest rates in the US. The higher interest rate will reduce the level of business investment and residential construction until they can be financed with the smaller volume of national saving plus the reduced capital inflows.
"Although the higher level of household saving will limit the rise in US interest rates, it will not change the fact that the combination of large future fiscal deficits and foreign lenders’ reduced willingness to buy US securities will lead to both a lower dollar and higher US interest rates."
America’s Saving Surprise
CAMBRIDGE – The household saving rate in the United States has tripled in the past three years.
Why?
And what does it mean for the US economy and the rest of the world?
"The rapid rise in saving has reduced consumer spending, slowing the pace of GDP growth in 2009 and in early 2010."
"If the saving rate continues to rise rapidly, it could push America’s fragile economy into another downturn."
"That would mean lower imports, creating a potential problem for countries that depend for their employment on exporting to the US."
Higher household saving depresses consumption because it is the difference between households’ after-tax income and what they spend.
The saving may be deposited in bank accounts or used to buy mutual funds or corporate stock.
Saving may also take the form of individual contributions to retirement accounts or employer contributions to corporate saving plans.
"Paying down debt on credit cards or mortgages also counts as saving – but increases in the value of existing assets like stocks or real estate do not, even though they increase the value of household wealth."
"In any year, some households are savers and others, especially retirees, are dissavers that use past saving to finance current consumption."
The nation’s net household saving rate is the difference between the saving of the savers and the dissaving of the dissavers.
The recent rise in the US household saving rate reversed a long-term decline that began 25 years ago.
"Before that, between 1960 and 1985, American households saved an average of 9% of their after-tax incomes."
The saving rate in each of those 25 years was between 7% and 11%.
"But, after 1985, a variety of changes caused saving to decline until it reached less than 2% in 2007."
"One reason was that rising stock markets and higher house prices made individuals wealthier, reducing their need to save for retirement and allowing retirees to dissave more."
The general shift from defined-benefit pension plans to defined-contribution plans meant that employees felt the effect of rising share prices directly in their own personal accounts.
"Moreover, the increased availability of credit cards gave Americans a greater ability to dissave, buying goods and services now and paying for them later."
Mortgages became more widely available.
"Rising house prices also allowed homeowners to refinance their mortgages, obtaining additional cash to spend on other things."
Credit lines secured by home equity provided another new way to finance spending.
All of this changed abruptly when the American economy fell into a deep recession at the end of 2007.
The stock market dropped sharply.
"Home prices fell 40%, completely wiping out the equity of one-third of all homeowners with mortgages."
Household wealth is now $10 trillion dollars less than it was before the recession began.
"That fall in wealth means that households must save more to prepare for retirement, and that retirees are not able to dissave as much as they did before."
Banks and credit-card companies have become much more cautious about extending credit.
"And, with unemployment stubbornly high, many households are saving in order to have additional cash if they should lose their job or be put on shorter hours."
There is no way to predict what the saving rate will do next.
"Households’ need to rebuild wealth, and the lack of access to credit, implies that the saving rate could continue to rise from the 6.4% recorded in June (the most recent month for which data are available) to the 9% rate that America averaged in the decades before 1985."
"If that were to happen quickly, total spending could decline, pushing the economy into a double-dip recession."
"But if households instead become optimistic about the pace of recovery, they might choose to cut back on their saving in order to maintain consumption, despite weak earnings."
Only time will tell.
Household saving is only one part of net national saving.
"Since after-tax personal income accounts for about 75% of GDP, a household saving rate of 6% translates into just 4.5% of GDP."
Corporate retained earnings have averaged about 3% of GDP after allowing for depreciation of existing plant and equipment.
The combination of household and corporate saving brings total private saving to 7.5% of GDP.
"Unfortunately, government borrowing to finance its deficit over the rest of this decade is projected to absorb about 5% of GDP."
That would leave a net national saving rate of just 2.5% of GDP.
"Such a low national saving rate would not be sufficient to finance the level of new investment in plant, equipment, and housing that the country needs."
"So, despite the rise in the household saving rate, unless federal government policies change to shrink America’s future budget deficits, the US will continue to be dependent on capital inflows from the rest of the world."
"If that happens, global imbalances will continue to add risk to the global economy."
America\u0027s Schizophrenic Economy
The news about America's economy that dribbled out over the first half of March painted - once again - a picture that only a schizophrenic could create.
Real investment (investment adjusted for the declining prices of high-tech and information-related capital goods) continued to roar ahead.
Production and sales were consistent with the consensus forecast of real GDP growth at an annual rate of 4% or more.
"Yet, despite all this, employment remained stagnant: net job creation in the United States continues to stall."
This does not mean that employment in America cannot grow.
"Roughly 300,000 more Americans are employed in education and health care than a year ago - an annual rate of employment growth of 1.7%."
A quarter of a million more Americans are employed in business and professional services than a year ago - a 1.6% annual rate of employment growth.
"The logic of stagnant employment is not that adding jobs to the American economy is impossible, but that demand growth is insufficient to create more jobs than are lost."
This is easy to demonstrate.
Total nominal spending in America grows at 5.5% per year.
Inflation is 1.5% per year. And overall productivity growth is 3.5% per year.
So the equation is simple: 5.5%-1.5%-3.5% = 0.5%.
"That 0.5% is all that is left for job growth, because that's all the job growth required to meet demand given the remarkably strong rate of growth of productivity."
Where America's productivity growth is coming from is clear.
"A relatively small part of it is coming from simple speed-up: in an economy where the amount of time it takes for the unemployed to find new jobs is close to a post-WWII record high, demands for speeding-up the pace of work will be met with a ""Yes, boss!"" rather than a ""Take this job and shove it!"""
A bigger part of this increased productivity comes from the extraordinary technological revolutions in computers and communications that have led to dramatic increases in the usefulness - and decreases in the cost - of high-tech capital.
"The boost to wealth provided by the ""new economy"" is exceeding even its most avid boosters' wildest dreams."
"What is unexpected is that the new wealth is flowing not to the shareholders of dot-com companies, but to purchasers and users of high-tech capital and the consumers they serve."
But why does this seem so surprising?
"At the end of the nineteenth century the huge amount of investment and technological progress in America's railroads appeared to benefit everyone but the stockholders and bondholders of railroad companies, as bust followed boom and ramming worthless securities down the throats of investors became Wall Street's favorite sport."
Yet another part of US productivity growth due to the fact that high-tech capital gives America's firms enormous incentives to make massive but hard to see - and even harder to measure - investments in organization and business processes that are complementary to computerization and networking.
For the US to have a rate of productivity growth of 3.5% per annum rather than the pre-1995 rate of 1.2% is amazing.
That means an annual increment to world income of $250 billion from this source alone.
That's the equivalent of adding productive power equal to a quarter of the economy of India - and adding it every year.
"This persistent acceleration in American productivity growth has, however, created a massive political problem for President George W. Bush."
"Demand growth at a pace that in any previous decade would have been seen as highly satisfactory is suddenly desperately insufficient, and Bush is being blamed (with some justice) for the slack labor market that has resulted."
But for everyone except Bush - and those left unemployed by the lag in demand - it is an extraordinary opportunity.
"The remarkable boosts to productivity that have been within America's grasp will ultimately lead to accelerating growth of real profits and real wages, if only US policy makers resist the temptation to pursue politically expedient, but economically damaging, measures to ""protect"" output and employment."
"As the world's leading-edge economy, America faces the hardest work in ensuring growth, for it must create - not only copy and adapt - new technologies, better forms of capital, and more productive business organizations."
"If America can grow as fast as it is now, that is very good news for other, less-developed economies, especially since one powerful effect of ongoing technological revolutions in computers and communications is to make it much easier to participate in the global division of labor now centered in the US."
"So the schizophrenic American economy is a sign that the world is entering an economic era of truly wonderful things - if only we properly, and patiently, grasp them."
America’s Scorched Earth Management
Signs of the American economy’s perilous condition are everywhere – from yawning fiscal and current-account deficits to plummeting home prices and a feeble dollar.
"But something that shows up in none of the economic indicators may be driving many of them: the deterioration of American management, which is undermining not only many of America’s great enterprises, but also its legendary spirit of enterprise."
"Paradoxically, one indicator that has been improving steadily in the US – productivity – may be the clearest sign of the problem."
"When it comes to productivity, managers either invest in employee training, more efficient manufacturing processes, and the like, or they take steps that appear to boost productivity in the short run but that erode it in the long run."
Productivity is a measure of output per hour worked.
So a company that fires all its workers and then ships from stock can look very productive – until it runs outs of stock.
"Of course, no company can do that, but many US companies have been shedding workers and middle managers in great numbers – the figures for January 2008 were up 19% from a year earlier."
"Meanwhile, those employees left behind must work that much harder, often without increased compensation."
"Workers’ wages, adjusted for inflation, fell in 2007, continuing a trend throughout this decade."
"That, too, is “productive” – until these overworked people quit or burn out."
A sustainable company is not a collection of “human resources.”
It is a community of human beings.
"Its strength resides in its people, its culture, and the goodwill it has built up among its customers and suppliers."
"So, as workers and middle managers have been departing these companies, they have taken with them not only much critical information, but often also the hearts and souls of their enterprises, with profound effects on American competitiveness."
"Consider high technology, where America is supposed to excel."
"According to a November 2006 report by The Task Force on the Future of American Innovation, made up of prominent universities, think tanks, industry trade associations, and corporations, the high-tech trade deficit widened in 2005, for the third consecutive year."
"This is not clothing or cars, but America’s largest, and most renowned, export sector."
This deficit reflects an underlying research deficit.
"Of the 25 companies granted the most US patents in 2006, only eight were American; 12 were Japanese."
"Perhaps this helps to explain why, in a survey of more than 60,000 people in 29 countries conducted in 2007 by the New York-based Reputation Institute to rank the “world’s most respected companies,” the first US company on the list appeared in 15th place; the second was in 25th place."
"No one can determine how much of America’s productivity gains in recent years have resulted from squeezing human capital, because such things are not measured."
"But there has clearly been a great deal of reliance on this strategy, with companies shedding employees not only because they must, but often because they have not met Wall Street analysts’ financial expectations."
Managers’ increased focus on maximizing shareholder value won many adherents when the idea was introduced in the 1980’s: the impersonal discipline of financial markets would force companies to become more productive and innovative.
"And, in fact, much of the US productivity increase in the 1980’s and 1990’s can likely be attributed to large-scale investment in information and communications technology."
"But, as the marginal productivity gains from such investment began to fall, senior managers’ survival and compensation continued to be tied to stock-market performance."
"As a result, many simply learned to manage their companies’ short-term share price at the expense of attention to their products and customers."
"Moreover, because maximizing shareholder value is a poor incentive for workers and middle managers, companies’ boards have increasingly centralized power around chief executives, thereby encouraging a “heroic” form of leadership that is detached from the rest of the enterprise."
"Indeed, in many cases, the CEO – frequently a Wall Street-endorsed “superstar” parachuted in to “shake things up” – now"
This shift to “heroic” leadership can be seen in ballooning CEO compensation.
"According to a January 2008 report by the Hay Group, the CEO’s of the 50 largest US companies are now paid almost three times what their European counterparts receive ­– which is many hundreds of times more than their own workers."
"Until recently, the US asset-price bubble ­– first in the stock market, then in real estate – masked the underlying depreciation of American enterprises."
But the bubble itself resulted from the same management pathologies as those afflicting the real economy.
"After all, managing for the short run encouraged mortgage lenders to offer artificially low “teaser” interest rates to lure potential homeowners."
And then those who bought these mortgages never bothered to investigate their underlying value – a spectacular abdication of managerial responsibility.
"Now that the bubble has burst, America’s current economic downturn is likely to be far worse than previous ones, because US enterprises will have to be rebuilt, slowly and carefully."
"The dramatic weakening of the US dollar may help America to narrow its massive trade deficit, but we should not expect any sustained improvement without drastic changes in American management."
"Fortunately, it may be possible to minimize the fallout for the rest of the world."
"While American economists, politicians, and business leaders have for years sought to sell their model of management abroad, many companies elsewhere have not been buying it."
"As a result, other key economies remain healthier than America’s."
"Make no mistake: this problem was made in America, and that is where it will have to be solved."
America’s Self-Defeating Hegemony
"When I wrote about the “end of history” almost twenty years ago, one thing that I did not anticipate was the degree to which American behavior and misjudgments would make anti-Americanism one of the chief fault-lines of global politics."
"And yet, particularly since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, that is precisely what has happened, owing to four key mistakes made by the Bush administration."
"First, the doctrine of “preemption,” which was devised in response to the 2001 attacks, was inappropriately broadened to include Iraq and other so-called “rogue states” that threatened to develop weapons of mass destruction."
"To be sure, preemption is fully justified vis-à-vis stateless terrorists wielding such weapons."
"But it cannot be the core of a general non-proliferation policy, whereby the United States intervenes militarily everywhere to prevent the development of nuclear weapons."
The cost of executing such a policy simply would be too high (several hundred billion dollars and tens of thousands of casualties in Iraq and still counting).
"This is why the Bush administration has shied away from military confrontations with North Korea and Iran, despite its veneration of Israel’s air strike on Iraq’s Osirak reactor in 1981, which set back Saddam Hussein’s nuclear program by several years."
"After all, the very success of that attack meant that such limited intervention could never be repeated, because would-be proliferators learned to bury, hide, or duplicate their nascent weapons programs."
The second important miscalculation concerned the likely global reaction to America’s exercise of its hegemonic power.
"Many people within the Bush administration believed that even without approval by the UN Security Council or NATO, American power would be legitimized by its successful use."
"This had been the pattern for many US initiatives during the Cold War, and in the Balkans during the 1990’s; back then, it was known as “leadership” rather than “unilateralism.”"
"But, by the time of the Iraq war, conditions had changed: the US had grown so powerful relative to the rest of the world that the lack of reciprocity became an intense source of irritation even to America’s closest allies."
"The structural anti-Americanism arising from the global distribution of power was evident well before the Iraq war, in the opposition to American-led globalization during the Clinton years."
But it was exacerbated by the Bush administration’s “in-your-face” disregard for a variety of international institutions as soon it came into office – a pattern that continued through the onset of the Iraq war.
"America’s third mistake was to overestimate how effective conventional military power would be in dealing with the weak states and networked transnational organizations that characterize international politics, at least in the broader Middle East."
"It is worth pondering why a country with more military power than any other in human history, and that spends as much on its military as virtually the rest of the world combined, cannot bring security to a small country of 24 million people after more than three years of occupation."
"At least part of the problem is that it is dealing with complex social forces that are not organized into centralized hierarchies that can enforce rules, and thus be deterred, coerced, or otherwise manipulated through conventional power."
Israel made a similar mistake in thinking that it could use its enormous margin of conventional military power to destroy Hezbollah in last summer’s Lebanon War.
"Both Israel and the US are nostalgic for a twentieth-century world of nation-states, which is understandable, since that is the world to which the kind of conventional power they possess is best suited."
"But nostalgia has led both states to misinterpret the challenges they now face, whether by linking al-Qaeda to Saddam Hussein’s Iraq, or Hezbollah to Iran and Syria."
"This linkage does exist in the case of Hezbollah, but the networked actors have their own social roots and are not simply pawns used by regional powers."
This is why the exercise of conventional power has become frustrating.
"Finally, the Bush administration’s use of power has lacked not only a compelling strategy or doctrine, but also simple competence."
"In Iraq alone, the administration misestimated the threat of WMD, failed to plan adequately for the occupation, and then proved unable to adjust quickly when things went wrong."
"To this day, it has dropped the ball on very straightforward operational issues in Iraq, such as funding democracy promotion efforts."
Incompetence in implementation has strategic consequences.
"Many of the voices that called for, and then bungled, military intervention in Iraq are now calling for war with Iran."
Why should the rest of the world think that conflict with a larger and more resolute enemy would be handled any more capably?
But the fundamental problem remains the lopsided distribution of power in the international system.
"Any country in the same position as the US, even a democracy, would be tempted to exercise its hegemonic power with less and less restraint."
"America’s founding fathers were motivated by a similar belief that unchecked power, even when democratically legitimated, could be dangerous, which is why they created a constitutional system of internally separated powers to limit the executive."
"Such a system does not exist on a global scale today, which may explain how America got into such trouble."
"A smoother international distribution of power, even in a global system that is less than fully democratic, would pose fewer temptations to abandon the prudent exercise of power."
America’s Self-Inflicted Decline
"MELBOURNE – If the broad post-World War II prosperity that has endured for six decades comes to an end, both the United States and Europe will be responsible."
"With rare exceptions, politics has become a discredited profession throughout the West."
"Tomorrow is always treated as more important than next week, and next week prevails over next year, with no one seeking to secure the long-term future."
Now the West is paying the price.
"President Barack Obama’s instincts may be an exception here, but he is fighting powerful hidebound forces in the United States, as well as a demagogic populism, in the form of the Tea Party, that is far worse – and that might defeat him in 2012, seriously damaging America in the process."
"America’s friends around the world watched with dismay the recent brawl in over raising the federal government’s debt ceiling, and the US Congress’s inability to come to anything like a balanced and forward-looking compromise."
"On the contrary, the outcome represents a significant victory for the Tea Party’s minions, whose purpose seems to be to reduce government obligations and expenditures to a bare minimum (some object even to having a central bank), and to maintain President George W. Bush’s outrageous tax breaks for the wealthy."
America’s current fiscal problems are rooted in a long period of unfunded spending.
"Bush’s wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and the manner in which he conducted the “global war on terror” made matters much worse, contributing to a totally unsustainable situation."
"Indeed, Obama inherited an almost impossible legacy."
"In the weeks since the debt ceiling agreement, it has become increasingly clear that good government might be impossible in the US. The coming months of campaigning for the US presidency will be spent in petty brawling over what should be cut."
The example of recent weeks gives us no cause for optimism that US legislators will rise above partisan politics and ask themselves what is best for America.
"In these circumstances, it is not surprising that financial markets have returned to extreme volatility."
"The expenditure cuts mandated by the outcome of the debt-ceiling debate will reduce economic activity, thereby undermining growth and making debt reduction even more difficult."
"Providing further fiscal stimulus to boost economic growth would carry its own risks, owing to the debt ceiling and another, more ominous factor: America is already overly indebted, and there are signs that major holders of US government securities are finally tired of being repaid in depreciated currency."
"Most importantly, China’s call for the introduction of a new reserve currency stems from its frustration with the failure of major governments – whether in the US or Europe – to govern their economic affairs with realism and good sense."
"China recognizes that America is in great difficulty (indeed, it recognizes this more clearly than the US itself), and that, given the poisonous political atmosphere prevailing in Washington, there will be no easy return to good government, economic stability, and strong growth."
"America’s leadership in world affairs began to weaken with the unilateralism of Bush, and today’s economic problems are reinforcing this tendency."
"To reverse America’s decline, Obama needs bipartisan support for his (quite mainstream) policies, but so far the US Congress has shown no stomach for a principled approach to its legislative duties."
"If Germany’s half-hearted efforts to stabilize Europe somehow turn out to be successful, America’s position will be further eroded, and central banks around the world will begin to regard the euro once again as a reliable alternative to the dollar as a reserve currency."
"The alternative, as China has suggested, would be to develop a new reserve currency."
These realities represent a power shift of a kind that we have not experienced in our lifetimes.
"China’s economic power over the US is now substantial, and will limit not only America’s influence in the financial markets, but also its capacity to use military power."
"If this forces America back towards what the international-relations scholar Joseph Nye calls “soft power and multilateral diplomacy,” it may well be a good thing."
"But such approaches are anathema to the US Republican Party, and to its Tea Party faction in particular, and they might unnerve the many Asians who are nervous at China’s growing military might."
The counter-argument – that any sell-off or failure by China to continue to buy US government securities would hurt China as much as America – is not valid.
"As each year passes, China’s markets expand worldwide, and its domestic market comes to represent a greater percentage of its own GDP."
"As a result, China will not need a strong dollar in the long term."
Americans need to get their economic house in order before China loses its incentive to support the dollar.
"On several occasions in the post-WWII period, the US has learned with great pain that there are limits to the effective use of military power."
American objectives could not be achieved in Vietnam.
The outcome in Iraq will not be determined until the last American troops have been withdrawn.
"In Afghanistan, where withdrawal dates have already been set, it is difficult to believe that a cohesive unified state can be established."
"As the efficacy of military power is reduced, so the importance of economic power grows."
"Recognition of these central realities – and bipartisanship in addressing them – is critical for America’s future, and that of the West."
America\u0027s Sick Health Care System
"Alone among industrialized nations, the United States lacks a national health insurance system."
Forty million Americans lack any form of health insurance; many more face losing their job-linked coverage in company layoffs.
"Meanwhile, US annual spending for health care totals $4,600 per capita, over twice the average of other industrial countries."
"Health care expenditure totals a world-leading 14% of GDP stands, for a grand total of $1.3 trillion--and rising."
"According to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), despite this colossal spending, America lags behind Japan and several European countries in standard measures of health: infant mortality, life expectancy at birth, and deaths that could have been prevented by appropriate medical care."
"The US spends more and gets less, and all indications suggest that the perverse economics of American health care will continue more or less unchanged indefinitely."
"The reason is that the losers in this system tend to be poor, politically unorganized, and inarticulate, while their more fortunate fellow citizens are insured for the costs of treatment and reap the benefits of the high-tech excellence for which American medicine is renowned."
"Starting with the President, continuing through the ranks of Congress and the federal bureaucracy, and extending to the nation's many millions of steadily, safely employed executives and workers, ample health insurance is a guaranteed benefit."
"Also safely insured, under the federal Medicare program, are 40 million elderly and disabled citizens."
"From their personal experience, the system works well."
The big bills incurred by expensive diagnostics and hospital stays are covered in large part or altogether.
"For the well insured, money is not a barrier to good care."
"The poor receive some coverage under the sparsely funded Medicaid program, jointly funded by Washington and the individual states."
"The not-so-poor population exists in a medical no-man's land, ineligible for public assistance but lacking the money to pay big bills."
"Many of the 40 million without insurance are employed, but at low-wage jobs and by companies that do not provide health insurance as a benefit."
"Some of the poor do manage to piece together the price of care, but the difficulties of doing so are becoming greater due to medical inflation, currently running at over twice the general rate of consumer inflation."
"Costs are being pushed higher by the arrival of new medical technologies, aggressive marketing of pharmaceuticals directly to consumers, and the public's high hopes for medical miracles."
"Many expensive treatments are beneficial. But many, although dubious or altogether worthless, easily become established in medical practice and produce a torrent of income for persuasive doctors serving well-insured patients."
"For example, surgery for arthritis of the knee fetches some $3 billion a year for doctors, but, according to a study conducted by the US Department of Veterans Affairs, it is therapeutically useless."
"Studies such as this are rare, because the doctors who profit from the practices being investigated do not welcome independent reviews that might demolish their trade."
"The federal Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, responsible for assessing the efficacy of medical treatments, has led a precarious existence under the gaze, and political contributions, of medical specialists."
"Attempts to bring economic rationality and equity to American medicine date back to immediately after World War II, when President Harry Truman's proposal for establishing a national health insurance system brought cries of ""socialized medicine"" and quick defeat in Congress."
"Richard Nixon instituted price controls to hold down soaring medical costs, but when the controls were lifted, prices took off."
The most determined effort to remake the system arrived with the Clinton administration's proposal for a comprehensive national health insurance system jointly financed by employers and the federal government.
"Once again, the health-care sector, fearing a loss of money and autonomy, mobilized determined opposition."
"Ineptly presented to the public, the Clinton plan died in Congress."
"Into the ensuing vacuum came managed care, which was designed to hold down health-care spending by controlling access to treatment."
"So ""incrementalism""--a small fix here and there--became the basic strategy of health-care reform, leading, for example, to programs to provide care for poor children and a current proposal to help the needy pay for drugs."
"Costs were contained, but not so the outcries of aggrieved patients who felt they were denied adequate care and the late-night comics who conjured up scenarios of ""drive-by"" obstetrics and other pointed jokes."
"According to the latest estimates, health-insurance premiums will rise this year by 10-15%, following similar increases in recent years."
"Corporate employers have responded by requiring employees to pay part of the insurance costs--which is, in effect, a pay cut."
But this has done nothing to address the underlying problem--the continuing rapid rise in the cost of health care.
Will America eventually emulate the rest of the industrialized world and provide health insurance for all?
"Maybe, but not soon."
"In the words of a renowned health economist, Victor Fuchs of Stanford University, ""National health insurance will probably come to the United States after a major change in the political climate, the kind of change that often accompanies a war, a depression, or large-scale civil unrest."""
America’s Sleeping Watch Dog
I want to deviate from my usual economic theme this month and focus instead on the system by which the press – mostly the American press – covers government nowadays.
"But perhaps this is not too great a deviation, for the behavior of the press affects not only politics, but economics as well."
"Consider an editorial written in March by the Washington Post’s editorial director, Fred Hiatt, in which he makes a very small and limited apology for the newspaper’s coverage and evaluation of the Bush administration."
"According to Hiatt, “We raised such issues” as whether the Bush administration had properly thought its proposed adventure in Iraq through, “but with insufficient force.”"
"In other words, Hiatt finds fault with himself and his organization for saying the right thing, but not loudly enough."
"Next, consider a comment by the former editor of the New York Times, Max Frankel, about how the Washington ecology of media leaks is healthy, because “most reporters do not just lazily regurgitate...leaks.”"
"Instead, “they use them as wedges to pry out other secrets” and so oversee the government."
"The system may be “sloppy and breed confusion,” but “tolerating abusive leaks by government [that misinform] is the price that society has to pay for the benefit of receiving essential leaks about government.”"
"So, where Hiatt sees a press corps that was a little too cowardly about overseeing the Bush administration, Frankel sees a press corps where a sloppy and confusing process is nevertheless doing a reasonable job."
I see a very different picture.
"It was the summer of 2000 when I began asking Republicans I know – generally people who might be natural candidates for various sub-cabinet policy positions in a Republican administration – how worried they were that the Republican presidential candidate, George W. Bush, was clearly not up to the job."
"They were not worried, they told me, that Bush was inadequately briefed and strangely incurious for a man who sought the most powerful office in the world."
"One of President Clinton’s problems, they said, was that the ceremonial portions of the job bored him – and thus he got himself into big trouble."
"Look at how Bush had operated as president of the Texas Rangers baseball club, they said."
Bush let the managers manage the team and the financial guys run the business.
He spent his time making sure the political coalition to support the Texas Rangers in the style to which it wanted to be accustomed remained stable.
"Bush knows his strengths and weaknesses, they told me."
"He will focus on being America’s Queen Elizabeth II, and will let people like Colin Powell and Paul O’Neill be America’s Tony Blair and Gordon Brown."
"By the summer of 2001, it had become clear that something had gone very wrong."
"By that point, Bush had rejected O’Neill’s and Christine Todd Whitman’s advice on environmental policy, just as he had rejected Alan Greenspan’s and O’Neill’s advice on fiscal policy, Powell’s and Condoleezza Rice’s advice on the importance of pushing forward on negotiations between Israel and Palestine, and – as we learned later – George Tenet’s and Richard Clarke’s advice about the importance of counterterrorism."
"A strange picture of Bush emerged from conversations with sub-cabinet administration appointees, their friends, and their friends of friends."
"He was not just under-briefed, but also lazy: he insisted on remaining under-briefed."
"He was not just incurious, but also arrogant: he insisted on making uninformed decisions, and hence made decisions that were essentially random."
"And he was stubborn: once he had made a decision – even, or rather especially, if it was glaringly wrong and stupid – he would never revisit it."
"So, by the summer of 2001, a pattern was set that would lead British observer Daniel Davies to ask if there was a Bush administration policy on anything of even moderate importance that had not been completely bollixed up."
"But if you relied on either the Washington Post or the New York Times, you would have had a very hard time seeing it."
"Today, it is an accepted fact that the kindest thing you can say about the Bush administration is that it is completely incompetent, which is the line now taken by hard-line Bush supporters like the National Review and the commentator Robert Novak."
Why didn’t the American press corps cover the Bush administration properly for its first five years?
I really do not know.
"I do know that the world cannot afford to rely again on America’s press for its information: fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me."
"So I appeal to all of you working for newspapers, radio, and television stations outside the United States: it is to you that we – including those of us in America – must look to discover what our own government is doing."
America’s Sputnik Moment in Beijing
"NEW YORK – August 8, 2008, may someday be remembered as the first day of the post-American era."
"Or it could be remembered as another “Sputnik moment,” when, as with the Soviet foray into outer space in 1957, the American people realized that the country had lost its footing and decided it was time for the United States to get its act together."
There was no mistaking the power and symbolism of the opening ceremonies for the Beijing Olympic Games on August 8.
"That multimedia spectacular did far more than trace China’s 5,000-year history; it was a statement that China is a major civilization that demands and deserves its rightful place in the global hierarchy."
"There was also no mistaking the symbolism of seeing President Bush, waving cheerfully from his spot in the bleachers while Chinese President Hu Jintao sat behind what looked more like a throne."
"It is hard to imagine that China’s government, which obsesses over every minute issue of diplomatic protocol, had not orchestrated this stark image of America’s decline relative to the country to which it owes $1.4 trillion."
It would be hard to imagine Franklin Roosevelt or Ronald Reagan accepting a similar relative position.
"At the very same time that Bush was waving from the stands, Russia was invading Georgia, America’s closest partner in the Caucasus."
Russia’s message to other West-leaning countries in the former Soviet world was clear: America cannot protect you.
"Frighteningly, the Russians were likely correct."
"While the Iraq quagmire has made it difficult for America to project force around the world, America’s growing debt, conflicts with friends and enemies alike, absence of any perceivable strategy for changing times, and its political system’s seeming inability to take action to address these challenges have combined to turn America into a struggling giant."
"Today, from Iran to Darfur to Zimbabwe to Georgia, the world is witnessing the effects of a budding post-American world, and the picture does not look pretty."
"As much as we all value the rise of new powers like China and India, it remains to be seen whether these countries will become as benevolent a power as America, however flawed, has been over the past half-century."
"Neo-colonialism is returning to Africa, the global project of human rights is in retreat, and the world trade system is becoming far less open."
Brutal dictators go unpunished because their interests are protected by large powers with stakes in their natural resources.
"Reversing this trend is not only in America’s interest, but also in the world’s interest."
"To do so, Americans must identify and address the great challenges the United States faces, starting from the ground up."
"Fixing America’s campaign finance structure, which leads to massive misallocations of government funds, resuscitating America’s wildly uneven and often moribund education system, building an immigration system that actively recruits the most talented people from around the world via a fast track to US citizenship, and developing a national energy policy that moves the US far more quickly toward energy independence would all be important steps in this direction."
Working to rebuild the traditional bipartisan foreign-policy consensus would also make the US a far more predictable partner to friends and allies around the world.
And America must be a respectful partner in order to encourage rising powers like India and China to play more constructive roles in international affairs.
"The world is not ready for the post-American era, and countries like China and India must play a far greater role in strengthening the existing institutions of world peace and, where appropriate, building new ones that can promote a positive agenda of security, dignity, rights, and prosperity across the globe."
"The world community is not there yet, and until it is, the world needs a new kind of American leader – a leader able to inspire Americans to fix their problems at home and work with partners across the globe in promoting a common agenda as bold and progressive as the order built from the ashes of World War II 60 years ago."
"The Beijing Olympics could be remembered as a new “Sputnik moment” for the US, inspiring the country to meaningfully face the music of a changing world."
"But America can make it so only by recognizing the great challenges it faces and taking bold steps towards addressing them, at home and with allies abroad."
America’s Suicidal Statecraft
"Since its victory in the Cold War, America’s global hegemony has rested on three pillars: economic power, military might, and a vast capacity to export its popular culture."
"The recent emergence of additional powers – the European Union, China, India, and a Russia driven to recover its lost status – has eroded America’s capacity to shape events unilaterally."
"Even so, America remains by far the world’s most powerful country; its decline has more to do with its incompetent use of power than with the emergence of competitors."
"It is American leaders’ “suicidal statecraft,” to use Arnold Toynbee’s pithy phrase for what he considered the ultimate cause of imperial collapse, that is to blame for America’s plight."
Consider the Middle East.
Nothing reveals the decline of the United States in the region better than the contrast between America’s sober use of power in the first Gulf War in 1991 and the hubris and deceit of today’s Iraq war.
"In 1991, America forged the most formidable international coalition since World War II, and led it in a fully legitimate war aimed at restoring regional balance after Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait."
"In 2003, America went to war without its trans-Atlantic allies after manipulating false assertions."
"In doing so, the US embarked on a preposterous grand strategy that aimed no less at simultaneously dismantling Iraq’s tyrannical regime, restructuring the entire Middle East, destroying al-Qaeda, and helping democracy to take root throughout the Arab world."
The result has been utter failure: military defeat and a severe degradation of America’s moral standing.
"Rather than undermining radical Islam, the US has legitimized it, in Iraq and beyond."
"Indeed, what will now shape the future of the region is not democracy, but the violent divide between Shiites and Sunnis that the Iraq war precipitated."
It is this Muslim civil war that is allowing al-Qaeda to gain a larger pool of recruits.
"With Iraq probably becoming the first Arab country to be ruled by Shiites, and hence integrated into an expanding Shiite Iranian empire, America’s Sunni allies in the region now view the US as unreliable."
"Indeed, the US is seen as practically complicit in inciting a monumental reversal of Islam’s fortunes, the Shia revival."
"Nor is the gospel of democracy especially dear to America’s Arab allies, for the call to democratize has only emboldened the Islamists to challenge the incumbent elites for power."
"Admittedly, violent Islamic fundamentalism has deeper roots in the fading promise of Arab nationalism."
"But America’s misbegotten democratic message has ended up alienating both its conservative regional allies, as it gave a new lease on life to political Islam, which can use the ballot box as a route to power, and the Islamists, whose electoral gains are then rejected by the US."
America’s biggest strategic blunder in the Middle East arguably concerns the emergence of Iranian power.
"By destroying Iraq as a counterbalancing regional force, the US dealt a major blow to its traditional Gulf allies, for whom Iraq served as a barrier against Iran’s ambitions."
America offered Iran on a silver platter strategic assets that Khomeini’s revolution failed to acquire either in eight years of war against Saddam or in its abortive attempts to export the Islamic revolution throughout the region.
"Likewise, Iran’s nuclear program gained momentum thanks to its sense of impunity following the colossal failure in Iraq of America’s concept of “preventive war.”"
The calamitous US military experience in Iraq has left it strategically diminished.
"Iraq has now become God’s playground, and America can hope to achieve a modicum of stability there only with the help of other regional powers."
"Nevertheless, the US will remain the most influential external actor in the Middle East, for its failure is one of leadership, not of actual power."
"Humbled by military defeat, America can recover its regional relevance only by avoiding the sin of hubris, and learning to lead without attempting to dominate."
"This requires engaging revolutionary forces like Iran and Syria; respecting, rather than ostracizing, those Islamist movements that have opted out from jihadism in favor of political participation; and leading an international alliance for an Arab-Israeli peace based on the Arab League initiative."
"Indeed, the paradox of America’s pernicious policies in Iraq is that they have created favorable conditions for an Arab-Israeli peace, as the emergence of Iran and the threat of a fundamentalist tsunami have focused Arab minds on the urgency of a settlement with Israel."
"The Palestinian issue is not the source of all the Middle East’s ills, but its resolution would dramatically improve America’s standing among Arabs."
"More importantly, it would deny Iran the ability to link popular Islamic and Arab causes with its own hegemonic ambitions."
America’s Three Deficit
BERKELEY – This year began with a series of reports providing tantalizing evidence that economic recovery in the United States is strengthening.
"The pace of job creation has increased, indicators for manufacturing and services have improved, and consumption spending has been stronger than anticipated."
But it is too early to celebrate.
"Output growth in the US remains anemic, and the economy continues to face three significant deficits: a jobs deficit, an investment deficit, and a long-run fiscal deficit, none of which is likely to be addressed in an election year."
"Although output is now higher than it was in the fourth quarter of 2007, it remains far below what could be produced if labor and capacity were fully utilized."
That gap – between actual and potential output – is estimated at more than 7% of GDP (more than $1 trillion).
"The output gap reflects a deficit of more than 12 million jobs – the number of jobs needed to return to the economy’s peak 2007 employment level and absorb the 125,000 people who enter the labor force each month."
"Even if the economy grows at 2.5% in 2012, as most forecasts anticipate, the jobs deficit will remain – and will not be closed until 2024."
America’s jobs deficit is primarily the result of inadequate aggregate demand.
"Consumption, which accounts for about 70% of total spending, is constrained by high unemployment, weak wage gains, and a steep decline in home values and consumer wealth."
The uptick in consumption in the last months of 2011 was financed by a decline in the household saving rate and a large increase in consumer credit.
Neither of these trends is healthy or sustainable.
"With an unemployment rate of 8.5%, a labor-force participation rate of only 64%, and stagnant real wages, labor income has fallen to an historic low of 44% of national income."
"And labor income is the most important component of household earnings, the major driver of consumption spending."
"Even before the Great Recession, American workers and households were in trouble."
The rate of job growth between 2000 and 2007 slowed to only half its level in the three preceding decades.
"Productivity growth was strong, but far outpaced wage growth, and workers’ real hourly compensation declined, on average, even for those with a university education."
"Indeed, the 2002-2007 period was the only recovery on record during which the median family’s real income declined."
"Moreover, job opportunities continued to polarize, with employment growing in high-wage professional, technical, and managerial occupations, as well as in low-wage food-service, personal-care, and protective-service occupations."
"By contrast, employment in middle-skill, white-collar, and blue-collar occupations fell, particularly in manufacturing."
"Hard-pressed American households slashed their savings rates, borrowed against their home equity, and increased their debt to maintain consumption, contributing to the housing and credit bubbles that burst in 2008, requiring painful deleveraging ever since."
Three forces have driven the US labor market’s adverse structural changes:
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
"Skill-biased technological change, which has automated routine work while boosting demand for highly educated workers with at least a college degree."
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
"Global competition and the integration of labor markets through trade and outsourcing, which have eliminated jobs and depressed wages."
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
America’s declining competitiveness as an attractive place to locate production and employment.
Technological change and globalization have created similar labor-market challenges in other developed countries.
But US policy choices are responsible for the erosion of America’s competitiveness.
"In particular, the US is underinvesting in three major areas that help countries to create and retain high-wage jobs: skills and training, infrastructure, and research and development."
"Spending in these areas accounts for less than 10% of US government spending, and this share has been declining over time."
"The federal government can currently borrow at record-low interest rates, and there are many projects in education, infrastructure, and research that would earn a higher return, create jobs now, and bolster US competitiveness in attracting high-wage jobs."
"President Barack Obama has offered numerous proposals to invest in the foundations of national competitiveness, but Congressional Republicans have rebuffed them, claiming that the US faces an impending fiscal crisis."
"In fact, the federal deficit as a share of GDP will shrink significantly over the next several years, even without further deficit-reduction measures, before rising to unsustainable levels by 2030."
"The US does indeed face a long-run fiscal deficit, largely the result of rising health-care costs and an aging population."
"But the current fiscal deficit mainly reflects weak tax revenues, owing to slow growth and high unemployment, and temporary stimulus measures that are fading away at a time when aggregate demand remains weak and additional fiscal stimulus is warranted."
"At the very least, to keep the economy on course for 2.5% growth this year, the payroll tax cut and unemployment benefits proposed by Obama should be extended through the end of the year."
These measures would provide insurance to the fragile recovery and add nothing to the long-run fiscal gap.
"So, how should the US economy’s jobs deficit, investment deficit, and long-run fiscal deficit be addressed?"
Policymakers should pair fiscal measures to ameliorate the jobs and investment deficits now with a multi-year plan to reduce the long-run fiscal deficit gradually.
"This long-run plan should increase spending on education, infrastructure, and research, while curbing future growth in health-care spending through the cost-containment mechanisms contained in Obama’s health-reform legislation."
Approving a long-run deficit-reduction plan now but deferring its starting date until the economy is near full employment would prevent premature fiscal contraction from tipping the economy back into recession.
"Indeed, enactment of such a package could bolster output and employment growth by easing investor concerns about future deficits and strengthening consumer and business confidence."
Painful choices about how to close the long-run fiscal gap should be decided now and implemented promptly once the economy has recovered.
"But, for the next few years, the priorities of fiscal policy should be jobs, investment, and growth."
America’s Unhinged “Pivot”
NEW DELHI – President Barack Obama’s first foreign trip since winning a second term highlights Asia’s new centrality to America’s economy and security.
"But Obama’s Asian tour also underscores the main question about American policy in the region: Will the United States’ “pivot” to Asia acquire concrete strategic content, or will it remain largely a rhetorical repackaging of old policies?"
"The United States, quick to capitalize on regional concerns triggered by China’s increasingly muscular self-assertion, has strengthened its military ties with its existing Asian allies and forged security relationships with new friends."
But the heady glow of America’s return to center stage in Asia has obscured key challenges in remaining the region’s principal security anchor in the face of China’s strategic ambitions.
"One challenge is the need to arrest the erosion of America’s relative power, which in turn requires comprehensive domestic renewal, including fiscal consolidation."
"But the need for spending cuts also raises the prospect that the US might be unable to finance a military shift toward the Asia-Pacific region – or, worse, that it will be forced to retrench there."
"The US under Obama has increasingly ceded ground to China, a trend that admittedly began when the Bush administration became preoccupied with the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq."
"This has spurred doubts about America’s ability to provide strategic heft to its “pivot” by sustaining a higher level of commitment in the Asia-Pacific region, where it already maintains 320,000 troops."
"The proposed deployment of an additional 2,500 Marines in Australia is largely symbolic."
"In fact, after raising Asians’ expectations of a more robust US response to China’s growing assertiveness, the Obama administration has started to tamp down the military aspects of its “pivot,” emphasizing instead greater US economic engagement."
"That change has come as a relief to those in the region who fear being forced to choose between the US and China. But, for the countries bearing the brunt of China’s recalcitrant approach to territorial and maritime disputes, this emphasis raises new doubts about America’s commitment."
"In fact, the economic reorientation of the US “pivot” corrects a policy that had overemphasized the military component and put the US on a path toward conflict with China."
It was Secretary of State Hillary Clinton who signaled a more hawkish US stance on China with her tough talk at the 2010 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum in Hanoi; now she is moderating that position by promoting trade and investment during her visits to Asian countries.
"Obama, too, is highlighting the economic aspects of the US “pivot,” portraying his Asia tour as an effort to generate more domestic manufacturing jobs through higher exports to “the most rapidly growing and dynamic region in the world.”"
"Even his historic visit to Myanmar – the first ever by a US president – is as much about trade as it is about weaning a strategically located, resource-rich country from Chinese influence."
"The refocus on trade and economic issues has also prompted Washington to promote the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which aims to create a new Asia-Pacific free-trade group that excludes China."
"Moreover, the US is emphasizing the importance of the East Asia Summit and ASEAN, whose summit overlaps with the EAS meeting in Phnom Penh that Obama will be attending."
"The US course correction is being dictated by another consideration as well: America has nothing to gain from taking sides in China’s disputes with its neighbors – unless, of course, US interests are directly at stake, as in the South China Sea, where Chinese maritime claims threaten freedom of navigation in some of the world’s most heavily trafficked shipping lanes."
"Concern for its own national interest explains why America has charted a course of tacit neutrality regarding the revival of Sino-Indian territorial disputes, including China’s sudden resurrection of a claim to the large Himalayan Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh."
"Similarly, the US has urged both China and Japan to resolve peacefully their dispute over the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands."
America’s main goal is to prevent the standoff from escalating to the point that it would be forced – against its own interests –&#160;to take Japan’s side.
"When US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta met Chinese leader Xi Jinping in China in September, he got “an earful” that the US should stay out of the Sino-Japanese dispute."
"Indeed, amid the orchestrated anti-Japanese protests in China in September, Panetta – instead of advising China to rein in the often-violent demonstrations –&#160;publicly reiterated America’s neutrality in the struggle over control of the islands."
The correction in US policy actually extends even to terminology.
"American diplomats have now abandoned the term “pivot” altogether, owing to its military connotation, in favor of “rebalancing.”"
"Whatever one calls it, the new policy approach is all about China, with America bolstering alliances and friendships with countries around China’s periphery, including India, Japan, the Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia, and South Korea."
"Yet the Obama administration continues to deny that China is at the center of its strategy. In fact, it is reluctant to say or do anything publicly that might raise China’s hackles."
"The Asia-Pacific region will loom larger in Obama’s second-term agenda, especially as the ongoing US troop withdrawal ends the Afghanistan war by 2014."
"But Obama will have to define a clearer US policy, addressing China’s rapid rise under an authoritarian regime that aggressively pursues border claims and whips up nationalism at home."
The US and the rest of Asia must not merely adjust to China; they must seek to shape a China that plays by the rules.
America’s War-Torn Economy
NEW YORK – Some say there are two issues in the coming American elections: the Iraq war and the economy.
"On days when the war seems to be going better than expected, and the economy worse, the economy eclipses the war; but neither is faring well."
"In some sense, there is only one issue, and that is the war, which has exacerbated America’s economic problems."
And when the world’s largest economy is sick – and it is now very sick – the entire world suffers.
It used to be thought that wars were good for the economy.
"After all, World War II is widely thought to have helped lift the global economy out of the Great Depression."
"But, at least since Keynes, we know how to stimulate the economy more effectively, and in ways that increase long-term productivity and enhance living standards."
"This war, in particular, has not been good for the economy, for three reasons."
"First, it has contributed to rising oil prices."
"When the United States went to war, oil cost less than $25 a barrel, and futures markets expected it to remain there for a decade."
Futures traders knew about the growth of China and other emerging markets; but they expected supply – mainly from low-cost Middle East providers – to increase in tandem with demand.
The war changed that equation.
Higher oil prices mean that Americans (and Europeans and Japanese) are paying hundreds of millions of dollars to Middle East oil dictators and oil exporters elsewhere in the world rather than spending it at home.
"Moreover, money spent on the Iraq war does not stimulate the economy today as much as money spent at home on roads, hospitals, or schools, and it doesn’t contribute as much to long-term growth."
Economists talk about “bang for the buck” – how much economic stimulus is provided by each dollar of spending.
It’s hard to imagine less bang than from bucks spent on a Nepalese contractor working in Iraq.
"With so many dollars going abroad, the American economy should have been in a much weaker shape than it appeared."
"But, much as the Bush administration tried to hide the true costs of the war by incomplete and misleading accounting, the economy’s flaws were covered up by a flood of liquidity from the Federal Reserve and by lax financial regulation."
"So much money was pumped into the economy and so lax were regulators that one leading American bank advertised its loans with the slogan “qualified at birth” – a clear indication that there were, in effect, no credit standards."
"In a sense, the strategy worked: a housing bubble fed a consumption boom, as savings rates plummeted to zero. The economic weaknesses were simply being postponed to some future date; the Bush administration hoped that the day of reckoning would come after November 2008.  Instead, things began to unravel in August 2007."
"Now it has responded, with a stimulus package that is too little, too late, and badly designed."
"To see the inadequacy of that package, compare it with the more than $1.5 trillion that was borrowed in home equity loans in recent years, most of it spent on consumption."
That game – based on a belief in ever-spiraling home prices – is over.
"With home prices falling (and set to continue to fall), and with banks uncertain of their financial position, lenders will not lend and households will not borrow."
"So, while the additional liquidity injected into the financial system by the Fed may have prevented a meltdown, it won’t stimulate much consumption or investment."
"Instead, much of it will find its way abroad."
"China, for example, is worried that the Fed’s stimulus will increase its domestic inflation."
There is a third reason that this war is economically bad for America.
"Not only has America already spent a great deal on this war – $12 billion a month, and counting – but much of the bill remains to be paid, such as compensation and health care for the 40% of veterans who are returning with disabilities, many of which are very serious."
"Moreover, this war has been funded differently from any other war in America’s history –perhaps in any country’s recent history."
"Normally, countries ask for shared sacrifice, as they ask their young men and women to risk their lives."
Taxes are raised.
"There is a discussion of how much of the burden to pass on to future generations. In this war, there was no such discussion."
"When America went to war, there was a deficit."
"Yet remarkably, Bush asked for, and got, a reckless tax cut for the rich."
That means that every dollar of war spending has in effect been borrowed.
"For the first time since the Revolutionary War, two centuries ago, America has had to turn to foreigners for financing, because US households have been saving nothing ."
The numbers are hard to believe.
"The national debt has increased by 50% in eight years, with almost $1 trillion of this increase due to the war – an amount likely to more than double within ten years."
Who would have believed that one administration could do so much damage so quickly?
"America, and the world, will be paying to repair it for decades to come."
America’s War with Itself in Central Asia
"WASHINGTON, DC – In its decade-long slog to secure Afghanistan, the United States has juggled contradictory foreign policies in Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, the fragile Central Asian states with key supporting roles in the war."
"There’s the policy of engaging the two post-Soviet states for their own sake, promoting good governance, human rights, and business ties – the usual grab-bag of US diplomacy. Then there’s the policy of using them as logistical hubs in the Afghanistan war."
"Unfortunately, the two policies have often worked at cross purposes, diminishing America’s long-term influence in the region and at times hurting its ability to conduct the war."
"And, as the US pours more troops and money into Afghanistan, military expediency is once again trumping other policy goals in Central Asia."
"In some ways, that is understandable: the US has a war to wage on a tight, self-imposed deadline."
"Fuzzy, feel-good projects to foster human rights and good governance in an obscure region next-door must wait."
"But that view fails to comprehend that a weakened, corrupt, and abusive Central Asia is not in America’s interest, or in Afghanistan’s for that matter."
"In Pakistan, the Afghan government already has a big, splintered, and nearly ungovernable neighbor."
A more sensible approach is to balance America’s real and pressing security needs in Afghanistan with a more wholesome policy in Central Asia.
"In Kyrgyzstan, a landlocked mountainous nation with a history of civil unrest and quick government overthrows, local politicians are furious about the US Defense Department’s recent decision to renew a controversial fuel-supply contract for the air base at Manas, a key hub for air operations over Afghanistan."
"The contract, awarded again to a secretive American firm, will keep US planes flying over Afghanistan, which is the paramount American goal in the region. But the opaque nature of the deal may further weaken America’s already wobbly standing in Kyrgyzstan, where the contract has been cast as a source of corruption that padded the bank accounts of two successive dictators."
"Although US congressional investigators found no evidence of kickbacks in the contracts, they did find instances of dishonesty and negligence that – at the very least – point to the US government’s willingness to overlook questionable practices."
"The fuel for the air base came mostly from Russia, and the main Pentagon contractor’s local dealers falsely claimed that it was intended for domestic civilian consumption, thereby benefiting from lower import tariffs."
"Given the volume of jet fuel involved, key players, including buyers, sellers, and US officials, obviously knew or should have known about the scheme."
"From the Pentagon’s standpoint, however, the contractors did exactly what they were supposed to do: deliver the fuel at a reasonable price."
That is why the contract was renewed.
"Though fragile and violent, Kyrgyzstan is the most democratic state in the region, and it could be America’s natural ally. But, by pursuing a blinkered foreign policy focused on jet fuel, America has done itself no favors."
"Indeed, the policy has emboldened pro-Russian politicians who would love nothing more than to see the Americans kicked out of Kyrgyzstan."
The horse-trading around the base has been intense.
"In a February meeting, the US ambassador to Kyrgyzstan asked her Chinese counterpart about reports that China had offered to pay Kyrgyzstan $3 billion if the Kyrgyz shut down the American base."
The two diplomats were conversing in Russian.
"“Visibly flustered, (the Chinese ambassador) temporarily lost his ability to speak Russian and began spluttering in Chinese to the silent aide diligently taking notes right behind him,” according to a confidential US diplomatic cable obtained by the Web site Wikileaks.org."
The meeting took place just months after Washington fended off Russian pressure on the Kyrgyz to close the base.
"In their meeting, the seasoned Chinese envoy counseled the US ambassador to pay the Kyrgyz $150 million a year to keep the base."
"“Very uncharacteristically, the silent young aide then jumped in: ‘Or maybe you should give them $5 billion and buy both us and the Russians out.’"
The aide then withered under the (Chinese) ambassador’s horrified stare.”
"Ever since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the US military has gained an outsize voice in the formulation of US foreign policy. Two wars and large defense budgets have given the Pentagon cash and clout to do things traditionally done by diplomats."
"In Iraq, for instance, young American officers walked around with wads of cash to buy the allegiance of wavering insurgents."
No diplomat could match that kind of influence.
"Something similar happened on the macro level, too."
"A recent report from George Soros’s Open Society Foundations that parses the past decade of US defense spending in Central Asia found that, in 2007 alone, the US provided $145 million in military aid to the region. That is “six times the amount the US government spent to promote rule of law, democratic governance, and respect for fundamental human rights.”"
The report concludes that “the US military has acquired an oversized impact on US foreign policy in Central Asia.”
Nowhere is this reality more visible than in Uzbekistan.
"The Pentagon ran a military base there until 2005, when Uzbekistan’s regime massacred a crowd of peaceful protesters, presenting the US government with a dilemma: look the other way and keep the base, or speak up and be kicked out."
"Though some hawks called for only muted criticism of the regime, the US had no choice but to condemn the massacre and be expelled."
One lesson should be that a security policy that’s detached from other human concerns is no viable security policy at all.
Bases that exist at the whim of mercurial regimes cannot be a foundation for America’s security.
"Over the past year, the US has returned to Uzbekistan – no soldiers this time, just new supply routes to keep the Afghan war going – and is apparently implementing the same military-centric policy that it pursued before 2005."
Local and Western pro-democracy advocates say that US officials in Uzbekistan have shown scant interest in their concerns.
America the Hypocritical
"In commemorating the 230th anniversary of America’s independence last July, President George W. Bush noted that the patriots of the Revolutionary War believed that all men are created equal, and with inalienable rights."
"Because of these ideals, he proclaimed, the United States “remains a beacon of hope for all who dream of liberty and a shining example to the world of what a free people can achieve.”"
"But, at the same time, his administration was holding approximately 400 prisoners at the US Naval Base at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba."
Some of them have now been there for more than five years. None of them has ever been put on trial.
"Last month, a highly reputable source confirmed that the Guantánamo prisoners are suffering from more than indefinite detention."
"The US Federal Bureau of Investigation released documents showing that an FBI agent witnessed “on several occasions” detainees who were “chained hand and foot in [a] fetal position to [the] floor,” without a chair, or food or water."
"In these conditions, “most urinated or defecated on [them]selves.”"
"They were left there for 18 or 24 hours, or more."
"On one of these occasions, the agent reported, “the air conditioning was turned up so low that the barefooted detainee was shaking with cold.”"
"On another occasion the room was unventilated, the temperature over 100 degrees Fahrenheit, and the detainee was almost unconscious on the floor with a pile of hair next to him – “he had apparently been pulling it out throughout the night.”"
"Another FBI agent was laughingly told by a civilian contractor, “[Y]ou have to see this.”"
He was then taken to an interrogation room where he saw a longhaired man with a full beard who was gagged with duct tape that “covered much of his head.”
"When the agent asked how the tape would be removed, he was not given any answer."
"Other FBI agents reported seeing prisoners left in shackles for 12 hours or more, again in cold conditions, being subjected to strobe lights and loud rap music for many hours, or being forced to wrap themselves in an Israeli flag."
The FBI report noted these incidents with the comment: “doesn’t seem excessive given Department of Defense policy.”
Several of the detainees told the FBI agents that they had no connection with terrorism and had no idea why they had been abducted and taken to Guantánamo.
Many prisoners were not captured fighting in Afghanistan.
"Some were picked up in Bosnia, Indonesia, Thailand, Mauritania, and Pakistan."
"The Bush administration says that the detainees are “enemy combatants” in the global war against terror – a war that is being waged around the world, and that could last for decades."
"The commander of the Guantánamo task force, Rear Admiral Harry B. Harris, Jr., recently defended harsh treatment of his prisoners, claiming, “They’re all terrorists; they’re all enemy combatants.”"
But the CIA has made mistakes before.
"For example, Murat Kurnaz, a German-born Turkish man, was held in Guantánamo for four years before being released last August."
"The case of Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen of Lebanese descent, appears to be another of these errors."
"Seized by the CIA in Macedonia, he was taken to Afghanistan and interrogated for five months before being released without charge."
A German court has now issued arrest warrants for those involved in his abduction.
"If there are any human rights at all, the right not to be locked up indefinitely without trial is surely one of them."
"The US Constitution’s Bill of Rights puts considerable emphasis on that right, specifying in the Sixth Amendment that in all criminal prosecutions, “the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury” and “to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him.”"
None of the Guantánamo inmates has been granted these rights.
"So it has never been proved, by the standards laid down in the US Constitution that any of them really are terrorists."
"But the Sixth Amendment does not apply to the Guantánamo prisoners, because they are not US citizens and are in a facility that, technically, is not part of US territory, although it is under the full control of the US government."
"Whatever US courts say about it, abducting people all over the world, locking them up for years without establishing that they are guilty of anything, and subjecting them to harsh and abusive treatment is a flagrant violation of international law."
"By any standard of justice, it is also just plain wrong."
"Tom Paine, the great American revolutionary and author of"
America the Pariah
America Wakes Up to Climate Change
"After years of debate in the United States, and opposition to action by the Bush administration, America is finally waking up to the reality of global climate change."
"Leadership is still not coming from the president, but the private sector has begun to act."
"Leaders of major US companies have decided that global man-made climate change is real, must be controlled, and that business must play a constructive part in the process."
"Thus, even as the Bush administration and some scientific contrarians pretend that there is no problem, US corporate leaders are seeking practical solutions."
The basic situation has been clear for years.
"Global use of fossil fuels is contributing to a sharp rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide, which is causing the Earth to warm."
Rainfall patterns are changing.
Deserts and dry regions are becoming drier.
Extreme weather events such as hurricanes and typhoons are likely to increase.
"Flooding in Europe is likely to intensify, a process that may already have begun."
"Sea levels are rising, and could climb sharply if global warming leads to a destabilization of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets."
"In short, the scientific evidence is strong and growing that the planet is at grave risk, with many ill effects already being felt and more to come."
The proper responses are also increasingly understood.
"We must move to a sustainable energy system, one that does not mean a huge increase of carbon in the atmosphere."
"This will require a shift to renewable energy sources such as solar power, and perhaps nuclear power, as well as new technologies to capture carbon dioxide at power plants and then to dispose of the carbon dioxide in safe underground deposits."
"Society will have to pay a price for these investments in new energy technologies, but the benefits will be vastly greater than the price."
"The US is the world’s major emitter of carbon dioxide from energy use, but it has done the least among all major economies to confront the global challenge."
The Bush administration claims that more research is needed before any action is taken.
"Yet real action in the US is starting, thanks to leadership in other parts of the world, and thanks to the enlightened understanding of some major American businesses."
"First, the rest of the world ratified the Kyoto Protocol to control emissions of carbon dioxide."
"At the beginning of this year, Europe introduced a new Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading Scheme that uses market-based incentives to control carbon emissions."
"American companies operating in Europe are part of that system for their European-based emissions, so that US companies are being pulled into climate control even if their own government avoids the issue."
"Second, major US investors, such as pension fund managers, are realizing that US companies that fail to control their emissions may be vulnerable to financial losses in the future."
"They know that, sooner or later, the US will have to join the rest of the world in controlling climate change."
"At that point, power companies that use antiquated technologies that emit massive amounts of greenhouse gases may face serious financial losses."
So investors are telling companies to report their carbon emissions today in order to assess future liabilities.
"Similarly, many company bosses know that pretending that climate problems do not exist is bad for shareholders, because reality will one day strike."
They know that investing today in clean technologies can give them a long-term competitive advantage.
"As a result, many companies are taking steps now to limit their emissions to avoid future financial liabilities and a lack of investor confidence."
"The most dramatic breakthrough of this kind occurred when General Electric, one of the world’s most important, innovative, and respected companies, announced that it was going “green” with a major new corporate focus on environmentally sound technologies and a commitment to limit its own greenhouse gas emissions."
"With GE’s leadership, which it termed “ecomagination” (combining ecology with imagination), many US businesses are sure to follow."
It is too early to count on success in engaging the US on climate change.
The Bush administration continues to delay and to avoid sound science.
Yet it is reasonably clear that a tipping point has been reached.
"Reality is catching up with the US, as it already has elsewhere in the world."
"As US citizens and businesses continue to suffer the results of climate change – heat waves, droughts, hurricanes, and floods – more and more Americans, including an increasing number of business leaders, will press America’s political leaders for real action."
"The solutions will not be easy, and the effort must last over many decades in all parts of the world."
But the effort needs to start now.
"As with Europe’s new carbon trading, all producers and consumers around the globe will need to face market incentives to adopt technologies and consumption patterns that slow (and eventually stop) the increase of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere."
"We will all need to pay a “market price” when we contribute to global climate change, so that we give true economic incentives to sustainable energy systems and new public investments – for example, mass transit – that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and thereby head off future climatic disasters."
The Right Weights for Mortgage Risk
"ABU DHABI – Ever since hunter-gatherers started to build their own dwellings some 14,000 years ago, homeownership has been a mark of high social and economic status."
"Today, the United States has built a mammoth financial bureaucracy to promote homeownership, and economists, bankers, politicians, and of course homeowners themselves keenly follow house-price indicators."
"But, as we have recently witnessed, unless mortgage risks are properly calculated, the dream of homeownership can all too easily become an economic nightmare."
Mortgage debt has become households’ biggest liability throughout the developed world.
"In the decade preceding the financial crisis, US mortgage debt increased almost threefold, while the real economy grew by only one-third. At its 2007 peak, US mortgage debt stood at $10.6 trillion – more than double the combined GDP of China and India."
The six major banking crises in the advanced economies since the mid-1970s were all associated with a housing bust.
"A real-estate price crash has also been a key cause of emerging-market crises, such as the 1997-98 Asian collapse."
Research shows that lost output during recessions accompanied by a housing bust is double or triple what it might otherwise have been had real-estate prices held up.
"Moreover, housing busts tend to prolong recessions by almost three years."
"Given the enormous social and economic costs when high levels of mortgage debt meet a crash in house prices, one would expect regulators to be fully engaged on the issue. Unfortunately, they are not."
"Although the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the primary global benchmark for bank regulations, proposed reforms after the 2008 crisis that are aimed at strengthening the financial system, mortgage regulations have changed little."
"The key to mortgage regulation is the concept of “risk weight,” a measure that increases with the probability that a borrower will default."
"For example, a loan to AAA-rated Microsoft has a 0% risk weight, meaning that it is virtually risk-free."
"A loan to the Indian government will have a risk weight of 50%, and one to a riskier Argentina will be weighted at 150%."
"When it comes to mortgages, the standard risk weight is 35% (down from 50% a decade ago)."
But banks can use internal mathematical models to calculate their own risk weights.
"This is akin to marking one’s own exam paper; unsurprisingly, banks’ risk scores are usually on the safe side."
"Consider, for example, a $200,000 bank loan to buy a $235,000 home."
"If the bank attaches a 10% risk weight to the loan, the risk-weighted equivalent is $20,000."
"If the amount of bank capital needed to protect that risk-weighted equivalent is 10%, then the bank requires just $2,000 of its own capital to fund the mortgage, $198,000 of which the bank itself borrows."
"All it takes to wipe out the bank’s own money is a 16% drop in the house’s price (from $235,000 to below $198,000)."
"US house prices – as measured by the S&amp;P/Case-Shiller National Home Price Index – fell by more than 30% from June 2006 to March 2009, while European countries, including Spain, Ireland, and the United Kingdom, experienced similar or greater declines."
The problem is that banks continue to offer big mortgages while having little of their own “skin in the game.”
"The IMF estimates that the average mortgage risk weight in Europe and Asia was 14% and 15%, respectively, with some banks using a risk weight as low as 6%."
"Recently, some regulators have become suspicious of banks’ do-it-yourself risk weights."
"In 2012, the UK authorities asked banks to apply a temporary minimum 15% risk weight to their mortgage portfolios, though that guidance expired in July."
The Swedish regulator has recommended that mortgage lenders raise their risk-weight floor from 15% to 25%.
"Although welcome, these steps may still be too little; more important, they lack flexibility."
"A better option would be to implement time-varying, pro-cyclical floors, forcing banks to hold more capital during housing booms."
"And, whereas a single, fixed floor might push banks toward riskier loans that offer higher returns for the same amount of capital, a dynamic system would allow lower floors for the lowest-risk mortgages and require higher floors for riskier loans."
"Moreover, while risk weight is an important macro-prudential lever, it must be used in conjunction with regulators’ other tools. These include mortgage eligibility criteria, such as loan-to-value and loan-to-income ratios, and dynamic provisioning (that is increasing banks’ mandatory loan-loss reserves during housing booms)."
"It is important to calibrate the impact of risk weights on housing-market cycles relative to other measures, not least because excessive and overlapping intervention could itself fuel dangerous cycles."
The reliance of modern banking regulation on risk weighting is nowhere more important than in the mortgage market.
"If regulators get it wrong, the entire edifice could collapse – yet again."
"The views expressed in this column are the author’s own, and do not represent those of the National Bank of Abu Dhabi."
Amnesty for Saddam?
"Senior US officials, including Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, have recently suggested that Saddam Hussein and his top henchmen might be given an amnesty for their past crimes in exchange for leaving Iraq and averting war."
Is such an amnesty a good idea?
How should it be judged by those attempting to end the practice of exempting from punishment government officials guilty of monstrous crimes?
These are weighty questions.
"In trying to answer them, two considerations seem fundamental."
"First, one should consider the severity of the crimes committed by those who would escape punishment."
"Second, we should consider how much death and suffering would be avoided by letting such a ruler and his henchmen go free."
A third factor that should also be taken into account is what damage would be done to the emerging international legal system for ending the impunity long enjoyed by state officials who use their power to commit atrocities.
"As for the severity of Saddam Hussein's criminal behavior, there is probably no official now in power anywhere in the world with as much blood on his hands."
An incomplete list of his crimes includes:
using chemical weapons against Iranian troops during the eight-year Iran-Iraq war that he started in 1980;
"murdering about 5,000 residents of the predominantly Kurdish town of Halabja in March 1988 through the use of chemical weapons, after using these weapons in previous months against Kurdish villages in the vicinity;"
"murdering about 100,000 Kurds during the ""Anfal"" campaign between February and September 1988, mainly by transporting the victims to a desert area where they were forced into trenches, machine-gunned, and then covered with sand by bulldozers;"
"destroying the ancient civilization of the Marsh Arabs in southeastern Iraq, followed by the forced resettlement and murder of the region's former residents;"
"his actions in Kuwait when Iraq invaded in 1990, including the disappearance--still unresolved--of hundreds of Kuwaiti citizens;"
avage reprisals against the Shiites in southern Iraq in the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War;
and persecution of any and all Iraqis suspected of dissent or disloyalty.
"Each of these constitutes a war crime, a crime against humanity and, in the case of the Anfal campaign and its mass slaughter, and perhaps also in the case of the Marsh Arabs, the gravest crime of all, genocide."
"Although we cannot know how many lives would be lost and how much misery would be inflicted in an invasion of Iraq to oust Saddam's regime, the cost would unquestionably be great."
"No matter how compelling the case for punishing Saddam Hussein and such partners in crime as Ali Hassan al-Majid (""Ali Chemical"" to the Kurds), Saddam's cousin and the principal organizer of the Anfal campaign, it is equaled by our duty to try to minimize harm to the living."
The apparent conflict between doing justice and preserving peace may be resolved through international law.
"As matters currently stand, there is no mechanism for bringing Saddam Hussein to trial."
"The International Criminal Court, which is now taking shape in The Hague with the selection of its first justices, does not have retroactive jurisdiction."
"It cannot consider crimes committed prior to July 1, 2002."
So Saddam could be tried only before a new
"If Saddam were granted sanctuary in a country such as Belarus or Libya, he would probably remain safe from prosecution, but only as long as he never leaves."
"For example, Uganda's Idi Amin and Ethiopia's Haile Mariam Mengistu--deposed tyrants who rival Saddam in the scale of their criminality--have taken care not to stray from their shelters in Saudi Arabia and Zimbabwe, respectively."
"If Saddam is ready to abdicate to preserve his life, he should get that much security, no more."
"Without amnesty from a body such as the UN Security Council, the theoretical possibility that he could be prosecuted would be preserved."
He could not move freely.
His crimes would neither be forgiven nor forgotten.
Amnesty for Saddam Hussein is simply intolerable.
But condemning thousands to death in order to be able to punish him is intolerable as well.
"Let him go where we can't get at him, but with no guarantee of impunity if his actions or fate bring him to a place where justice can be done."
A More Perfect Monetary Union
WARSAW – The eurozone is often considered an experiment – a monetary union without political unification.
"Those who make this claim seem to have in mind a model of a single state, which possesses two relevant features: limited fiscal sovereignty for regional and local governments and a substantial common budget from which regions hit by asymmetric shocks can receive transfers."
"Those who claim that “political union” is necessary for the eurozone appear to focus on the second feature, despite the fact that fiscal constraints on local governments are clearly a typical and important component of single states."
"In this sense, they ignore the fact that the European Union’s Stability and Growth Pact has been in principle an important component of political union, not its substitute."
"Indeed, the eurozone’s current fiscal problems do not result from the lack of a large common budget, but from weak enforcement of the Pact."
"More fundamentally, monetary unions – in a broader sense – have existed not only within single states, but also in groups of sovereign states, the gold standard being the most notable example in history."
The experience of such monetary unions offers two lessons.
"First, they required fiscal discipline in the member states, which was true under the gold standard, with its informal norm of balanced budgets."
"Second, they existed without any fiscal transfers from a common center, because such a center did not exist."
"Instead, a great deal of flexibility, including within their labor markets, facilitated adjustment to asymmetric shocks."
It is clear that there is no scope in the foreseeable future to extend the EU budget in order to increase fiscal transfers to eurozone members affected by sharp declines in consumption.
"This would require an enhanced level of European identity, something which the Union’s political elites cannot generate artificially. &#160;But the crucial point is not that a large common budget in the eurozone is politically impossible to achieve, but rather that it would not address the main problem: the weakness of the mechanisms safeguarding fiscal discipline in the member states."
Instead of looking at the wrong model – that of a single state – the EU and its member states should focus on the conditions required for the proper functioning of a currency union that has no common budget to compensate for asymmetric shocks.
"First, utmost priority should be given to strengthening the mechanisms aimed at preventing pro-cyclical policies and large fiscal shocks."
"This requires ensuring the credibility and transparency of the accounting rules that define budget deficits and public debt, with closer monitoring also focusing on the development of asset bubbles, which cause deep recessions – and thus sharp increases in budget deficits – when they burst."
"Likewise, the European Central Bank’s monetary policy should “lean against the wind” by paying more attention to the development of asset bubbles."
"As the ECB’s common monetary policy cannot fit the macroeconomic conditions of all the member countries, the eurozone countries need macro-prudential regulations that aim at reducing excessive credit growth."
"Meanwhile, the Stability and Growth Pact should be strictly enforced, which implies using and strengthening the available sanctions."
"To be sure, initiatives at the EU and/or eurozone level cannot substitute for stronger mechanisms of discipline in the member states, which are ultimately the responsibility of national politicians and publics."
"But EU-wide measures aimed at ensuring discipline are necessary to spur the growth of preventive mechanisms in the member states, and such initiatives are largely dependent on the large countries, which thus bear a special responsibility for the developments within the eurozone – and within the EU."
"Second, beyond strengthening economic institutions, EU countries must accelerate structural reforms to boost their long-run growth prospects and facilitate their smooth adjustment to shocks."
"The former are necessary to help Union members grow out of their increased public debt, while the latter would help them to address unemployment."
"Of the many necessary measures in this area, the most important include a vigorous effort to complete the Single Market, coupled with avoidance of economic nationalism at all costs."
"Moreover, the Lisbon Agenda should be reinvigorated, with a focus on market reforms, and the EU should urgently reconsider measures – particularly regarding climate policy and the drift toward an EU-wide social policy – that risk imposing additional burdens on their economies and/or hamper the flexibility of markets."
"In this respect, the mode of fiscal reforms is fundamentally important."
"As EU members already have large tax burdens, further tax increases would weaken the forces of growth."
"Thus, fiscal reform should focus on reducing the growth of spending commitments, which –given the aging of EU societies – must include raising the retirement age."
"Finally, rigid labor markets and, more generally, regulatory constraints on prices and on the supply response of the economy, deepen recessionary reactions to various shocks, and contribute to the growth of unemployment."
"Therefore, labor-market liberalization should be a high priority and another area of focus for the reinvigorated Lisbon Agenda."
"European elites are fond of exclamations about “European solidarity,” “social cohesion,” and the “European social model.”"
But no amount of lofty rhetoric can substitute for the reforms outlined here – or obviate the need for them.
Hardening Brazil’s Soft Power
"BRASILIA – It is, perhaps, a truism for Brazil’s citizens that their country is and always will be a peaceful one."
"After all, Brazil has lived with its ten neighbors without conflict for almost 150 years, having settled its borders through negotiation."
"It last went to war in 1942, after direct aggression by Nazi U-boats in the South Atlantic."
"It has forsworn nuclear weapons, having signed a comprehensive nuclear-safeguards agreement with Argentina and the International Atomic Energy Agency."
"Through the Common Market of the South (Mercosur) and the Union of South American Nations (Unasur), Brazil is helping to integrate the region politically, economically, socially, and culturally."
But is soft power enough for one of the world’s major emerging countries?
"To be sure, Brazil’s peaceful foreign policy has served it well."
Brazil has used its stature to advance peace and cooperation in South America and beyond.
"Its constructive stance derives from a worldview that accords pride of place to the values of democracy, social justice, economic development, and environmental protection."
"Brazil’s unique approach to promoting these ideals is an important source of its soft power, reflected in the broad international support that placed Brazilians atop international institutions like the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Trade Organization."
Yet no country can rely on soft power alone to defend its interests.
"Indeed, in an unpredictable world, where old threats are compounded by new challenges, policymakers cannot disregard hard power."
"By deterring threats to national sovereignty, military power supports peace; and, in Brazil’s case, it underpins our country’s constructive role in the pursuit of global stability."
That role is more necessary than ever.
"Over the past two decades, unilateral actions in disregard of the UN Security Council’s primary responsibility in matters of war and peace have led to greater uncertainty and instability."
"Likewise, little progress toward nuclear disarmament has been made, in disregard of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty."
"Brazil’s abundance of energy, food, water, and biodiversity increases its stake in a security environment characterized by rising competition for access to, or control of, natural resources."
"In order to meet the challenges of this complex reality, Brazil’s peaceful foreign policy must be supported by a robust defense policy."
"Brazil’s National Defense Strategy, updated in 2012, states that the modernization of the Armed Forces is intrinsically linked to national development."
"Thus, it emphasizes the need to strengthen the domestic defense industry."
"In accordance with the Strategy, Brazil is enhancing its conventional deterrence capabilities, including by building a nuclear-propelled submarine as part of a naval program commensurate with its responsibilities in the South Atlantic."
"Brazil coordinates closely on defense matters with its neighbors, both bilaterally and through Unasur’s South American Defense Council, which aims to promote confidence-building, transparency, a joint regional defense industry, and, most important, a common defense identity."
"One potential mechanism for advancing these objectives is a South American Defense College, now under consideration."
South America is becoming a region where war is unthinkable – what the political scientist Karl Deutsch once called a “security community.”
"Having visited every South American country in my tenure as Defense Minister, I am convinced that, the most effective deterrent on the continent is cooperation."
"At the same time, Brazil is pursuing increased bilateral defense cooperation with African partners."
"With our neighbors on both shores of the South Atlantic, Brazil is working closely to strengthen the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic (ZPCSA), which aims to keep the ocean free from rivalries foreign to it and from nuclear weapons."
"Brazil is also reaching out to other emerging countries, such as its fellow BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) and members of the IBSA Dialogue Forum (India, Brazil, and South Africa)."
"For example, Brazil conducts IBSAMAR, a regular trilateral naval exercise, with South Africa and India."
"More broadly, we are exploring ways to cooperate in the joint development of defense technologies."
"Through such endeavors, Brazil hopes to contribute to a more balanced international order, one less subject to hegemonies of any kind, without losing sight of the importance of mutually beneficial partnerships with developed countries."
"Even as Brazil hardens its soft power, it remains deeply committed to the path of dialogue, conflict prevention, and the negotiated settlement of disputes."
The presence of Brazilian peacekeepers in countries like Haiti and Lebanon underscores Brazil’s contribution to maintaining peace and security worldwide.
"In the twenty-first century, a truly stable global order will depend on a legitimate and effective UN Security Council, one that reflects the plurality of the emerging multipolar world."
A Movable Financial Feast
LONDON – There was a time when league tables were to be found only on the sports pages of newspapers.
Now they are a global obsession.
"There are school and university league tables, rankings of companies on profitability or corporate social responsibility, tables of happiness indicators by country, and tables that attempt to rank consumer brands by value."
There is even a league table of the world’s funniest jokes (I did not laugh much).
The financial world is also full of such rankings.
"Investment bankers wait with bated breath for the merger and acquisition league tables, even though the link between a high ranking and profitability is somewhere between loose and non-existent."
"Bank league tables have been with us for a while, and now tend to be based on capital strength, rather than asset volume, which is an improvement of sorts, but still not very meaningful."
There are also now several different league tables – which are generating considerable angst – that rank financial centers based largely on surveys of firms.
"How badly the financial crisis damaged the reputation and performance of the major Western centers is a question increasingly asked in London, and to a lesser extent in New York."
"(Some Americans tend to think that the world will beat a path to their door, no matter how badly they are received when they arrive!)"
"So far, the message from the most recent tables is not too alarming for the incumbents."
A ranking prepared for the City Corporation in London shows New York and London still neck and neck at the top of the league.
"The Banker magazine produces another, with New York on top and London a close second – though the distance between them and their pursuers is narrowing."
"The scores in both London and New York for the quality and intensity of regulation, and the tax burden, have dropped."
Firms seem nervous about the future in both areas.
"The most striking change in the rankings is the rise of major Asian financial centers – and not just Hong Kong and Singapore, but also Shanghai, Beijing, and Shenzhen."
"The Chinese have been explicitly promoting their financial centers, and the impact is beginning to be seen."
"The World Economic Forum’s Financial Development Index – yet another league table to consider – shows Hong Kong and Singapore very close indeed to London, with China now ahead of Italy on the overall measure of financial sophistication."
Noodles are beating spaghetti.
Some of this is unsurprising.
"As the world’s center of economic gravity shifts east, the balance of financial activity is bound to move with it."
"On the principle that if something is inevitable, it is wise to welcome it, the appropriate response in London and New York is to find ways of collaborating with these new centers."
But the more important question for the traditional financial centers is whether international activity that can move really is moving.
That is far harder to judge.
There are anecdotes about individual hedge-fund managers moving to Geneva.
"Every time a government, or a regulator, announces some new control, or a tightening of existing controls, there are threats from bankers that they will pack up and leave town, taking their Porsches and mistresses with them."
"These threats, which used to have a lot of political impact, are now much less effective."
"Some politicians and commentators quickly say, “Good riddance.”"
"Even the Bank of England has asked whether, given the cost of mopping up the mess caused by the latest crisis, it is worth playing host to a global financial market."
This is risky speculation.
However badly bankers have behaved – and some clearly deserve a decade or more in the sin bin – financial services are a crucial element of London’s economy.
"If the financial sector declines, what will replace it in employment terms?"
Airy talk about science and manufacturing as ladders out of recession (a favorite image of former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown) is just that – empty words.
"There are few, if any, examples of high-cost post-industrial societies reviving their manufacturing sector on a large scale once it has declined."
"London, in particular, has no inalienable right to be a global financial center."
"The United Kingdom’s domestic market is, after all, much smaller than that of the United States."
"Indeed, the location of financial activity has changed through the centuries."
"If incumbency were a permanent advantage, Goldman Sachs’ global headquarters would be in Babylon."
"There must be a tipping point at which some combination of higher taxation, more burdensome regulation, and a hostile political climate causes financial firms to relocate."
There is a risk that Britain may now be approaching that point.
"That is why the UK’s Financial Services Authority, and even the Confederation of British Industry, which speaks largely for non-financial firms concerned about access to credit, has begun to call for a truce between the authorities and financial markets."
"The next two or three months will determine whether peace breaks out, and, if it does, whether it will endure."
"As is always the case in peace negotiations, both sides must be willing to compromise."
Firms will need to show visible restraint when it comes to this year’s bonus round.
The British government will not tolerate another jamboree.
And governments on both sides of the Atlantic will need to decide just how far they want to go in punishing banks.
Continued threats of ever-higher tax burdens could prove dangerously counterproductive.
"If we fail to settle on a new social contract between the state and the markets soon, those markets may indeed move elsewhere."
A Murder in Moscow
It is time to end the fiction that Vladimir Putin’s “dictatorship of law” has made postcommunist Russia any less lawless.
"The murder of Anna Politkovskaya, one of Russia’s bravest and best journalists, a woman who dared to expose the brutal murders committed by Russian troops in Chechnya, is final proof that President Putin has delivered nothing more than a run of the mill dictatorship with the usual contempt for law."
"This recognition is a timely one for the world to make, particularly Europe."
Germany’s Foreign Ministry is preparing a policy on Russian/German relations that will enshrine indifference to Putin’s lawlessness as being in the national interest of the most powerful member of the European Union.
"But indifference becomes appeasement when it encourages Putin to pursue his lawless ways in the international arena, as in his current campaign to strangle Georgia’s economy."
"The killing of Politkovskaya has incited an eerie sense of déjà vu : just as in the KGB’s heyday, people simply disappear in Putin’s Russia."
Politkovskaya’s is the third politically tinged killing in three weeks.
"Enver Ziganshin, the chief engineer of BP Russia, was shot to death in Irkutsk on September 30."
"Andrei Kozlov, the deputy governor of Russia’s central bank who was leading a campaign against financial fraud, was assassinated on September 14."
"The fact that Russia’s Prosecutor General Yuri Chaika, took over the investigation into Politkovskaya’s killing, as he did with the murder of Kozlov, doesn’t inspire hope, as such senior level involvement would in any real democracy."
"In fact, the involvement of the highest level of Russia’s government is almost a guarantee that the killers will never be found."
Politkovskaya’s murder is a particularly grim augury when you consider that she was a powerful critic of Russia’s President.
"In her articles for one of the few remaining independent papers in Moscow,"
I am not accusing Putin’s government of the contract killing of Politkovskaya.
"After all, as a campaigning investigative journalist she made many people angry besides Putin, not least of which is the current Chechen Prime Minister, Ramzan Kadyrov, whom she accused of a policy of kidnapping for ransom."
"But even if Vladimir Putin’s associates had nothing to do with Politkovskaya being gunned down in an elevator of her apartment building in the center of Moscow, his contempt for law created the climate in which the murder was carried out."
"Like the murder of Archbishop Thomas Beckett in his Canterbury Cathedral many centuries ago, the crime was committed in the clear belief that it would please the king."
Given what Politkovskaya represented—the responsibility of a democratic press to question the Kremlin and its policies—the government should have made certain that nothing bad happened to her.
Putin’s Russia has already lost 12 leading journalists to murder in the past six years.
"None of those crimes has been solved, which would not be the case if Putin’s “dictatorship of law” was anything more than a PR strategy."
The six year period since Vladimir Putin arrived in the Kremlin has been a time of deeply conflicting signals.
"On one hand, the world sees a young, educated leader pledging to modernize Russia, particularly in terms of bringing its law enforcement and judicial practices into line with international norms."
"On the other, the president watches in silence while his ex-colleagues in Russia's FSB security service (the former KGB) provide no security to those murdered, and launch a series of notorious espionage cases against journalists, scientists, and environmental activists."
"These “neo-spies” include journalist Gregory Pasko, arms control expert Igor Sutyagin, diplomat Valentin Moiseyev, physicist Valentin Danilov, and others."
The supposedly civilizing influence of being a Western partner — chairing a G-8 summit in Saint Petersburg for example — seems to have been lost on Putin’s Kremlin cabal.
Once again exposure to Western values has delivered another Potemkin Village;
"Russia presents a façade of laws and democratic institutions, but behind that cardboard surface the same arbitrary brutes rule."
The danger for the world is that Putin’s lawlessness is being exported.
"Across Russia’s near abroad, a form of criminalized diplomacy is taking root."
"Look at Putin’s attempt to rig Ukraine’s previous presidential election, and the on again off again criminal charges brought against the opposition leader Yuliya Tymoshenko."
Look at the rogue breakaway regions in Moldova and Georgia that exist only because of the Kremlin’s backing.
Look at how the Kremlin seeks to blackmail its neighbors by threatening their energy supplies.
"Every policeman knows that when you ignore criminal behavior, criminals grow bolder."
It is past time for the world to recognize Vladimir Putin for what he is: a man who is taking Russia back into the shadows.
So the world must now ponder that old Latin maxim
An Accidental Cure for Iraq
Doctors use the word “crisis” to describe the point at which a patient either starts to recover or dies.
President George W. Bush’s Iraqi patient now seems to have reached that point.
"Most commentators appear to think that Bush’s latest prescription – a surge of 20,000 additional troops to suppress the militias in Baghdad – will, at best, merely postpone the inevitable death of his dream of a democratic Iraq."
"Yet as “Battle of Baghdad” begins, factors beyond Bush’s control and not of his making (at least not intentionally) may just save Iraq from its doom."
"One key factor is that, for the first time since the United States and Britain invaded Iraq, Arab Sunni leaders are backing a US military plan for that country."
"These Sunni leaders live in abject fear of the geopolitical earthquake that any disintegration of political authority in Baghdad would bring, believing that all-out civil war would invariably follow – a war that would not respect international borders."
"Of course, America has been encouraging Sunni leaders in this belief."
"Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice’s recent tour of Middle East capitals helped spread the word to Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf states that any US failure and sudden withdrawal would be certain to destabilize them."
"Given the fragile grip that these leaders have over their societies, America’s warnings have been taken to heart."
"But the truly curious factor that might bring success to Bush is that those who have opposed or resented America’s presence in Iraq, such as the Iranian-backed Shi’a parties now also appear to want Bush’s new strategy to succeed."
"They are for it because they believe it will defang Moqtada al-Sadr, the rogue Shi’a cleric whose power has mushroomed over the past three years – to the point that he now dominates much of Baghdad and holds the allegiance of countless angry young Shi’a men."
"Of course, attacking Moqtada al-Sadr’s Mahdi Army in the name of fighting militia death squads has the potential to draw American military forces into a level of urban warfare unseen since the Falluja assaults of 2004 and 2005."
"Al-Sadr is seen as the protector of the Shi’a of Iraq and has are an estimated 60,000 fighters in his militia."
"But he is deeply mistrusted by other Shi’a leaders, who fear that they may one day have to take him on by themselves."
"Better to let the Americans do it, though of course these Shi’a leaders prefer a slow strangulation of al-Sadr to a direct and bloody assault."
But make no mistake: how al-Sadr is handled is the big test of Bush’s new strategy.
"Should the US choose to face al-Sadr and his forces head on, they risk alienating Iraq’s largest sectarian community, the Shi’a, adding fuel to the anti-occupation resistance and thus probably dooming Bush to failure."
"Iran and Syria, which have played a spoiler role in Iraq up to now, may also now be anxious to find a way to pull the country back from the brink."
"Bush still refuses to talk to either of them, and has lately been having US troops arrest Iranian agents in Iraq."
"Yet Iran may already see itself as victorious, with the current Iraqi government friendlier than any the Iranians have ever known."
"So maintaining that government in office has now become a strategic priority for Iran, particularly as it is now clear that any US hopes of using Iraq as a permanent military base are dead."
"The “surge” also opens, perhaps for the first time, a serious possibility of pouring water on the insurgent fires in Anbar province, the heartland of the Sunni insurgency."
The US has achieved relative successes in the province through alliances with Sunni tribes.
The hope is that such realistic and pragmatic accommodations will be extended to Iraqis who are fighting under the banner of a nationalist and anti-occupation agenda.
So some of the stars have come into alignment for Bush.
"But to keep them there in the long term, the Iraqi government will need to amend the constitution in a way that appeases the Sunni community."
"Reassuring Iraq’s Sunnis that they have a place in the new Iraq will also reassure neighboring Sunni governments, which have mostly turned a blind eye to the support for the insurgency that has come from their lands."
"Of course, should the US see failure ahead, it could seek to broaden the war beyond Iraq’s borders by attacking Iran, a policy reminiscent of “Operation Sideshow,” when US failure in Vietnam in the late 1960’s enticed President Nixon into attacking Cambodia and Laos."
"But Iran has resources that Cambodia and Laos could never muster; indeed, its ability to retaliate could set the entire region ablaze."
"Whereas America’s war in Indochina was a tragic mistake, the cost of a wider war precipitated by the crisis in Iraq would be incomparably greater – for both the patient and the doctor."
An Afghan Homecoming
"KABUL – As if the armed conflict between Afghan government forces supported by the American-led coalition and the Taliban were not enough, Afghanistan is faced with a crisis that it wishes it could call a success: the Big Return."
"From Jalalabad to Herat – indeed, all over northern Afghanistan – you can see the signs of Afghans returning from exile. Colorful Pakistani trucks are everywhere, carrying beams and wooden window, door, and bed frames, with wives and children sitting on top."
"The scale of the displacement was enormous: at the height of the exodus, up to six million Afghans were living outside their country, mainly in Pakistan and Iran."
"Roughly three-quarters of them fled after the Soviet invasion in 1979, with smaller numbers escaping the rule of pro-Soviet president Najibullah or the subsequent 1992-1996 civil war between the various mujahideen parties and then the rule of the Taliban."
Some – having supported the Taliban – fled after their leaders were ousted when the Northern Alliance entered Kabul in November 2001.
"Since then, more than 3.5 million Afghan refugees have already come home."
"Yet those still remaining beyond Afghanistan’s borders are the biggest “caseload” of refugees in the world, and there are many Afghan migrants, too, especially in Iran."
"Pakistan is home to most remaining Afghan refugees, perhaps as many as 1.9 million."
"When a registration of all Afghan refugees in Pakistan was carried out in 2007, almost half of them were living in camps."
"Three decades after being established, these “camps” are now villages of mud-plastered houses with high walls around the compounds."
"Since three-quarters of the refugees are under the age of 28, most have never seen their parents’ homeland."
"They were born and raised in Pakistan, and most speak only Pashto, one of the two official Afghan languages."
"Pashto is spoken by the tribes on both sides of the Durand Line, the border drawn at the end of the nineteenth century by the British colonial rulers of India."
"Despite these ethnic ties, and despite having hosted them for 30 years, Pakistan does not officially allow Afghans to integrate locally."
"They have no prospects for citizenship, no work permits, and no access to public health and education."
So their only good choice is “return.”
The frontier region between Pakistan and Afghanistan is the main theater of the “war on terror.”
"Here one finds Tora Bora, the last known home address of Osama bin Laden."
"The area’s volatile situation provides Pakistan’s government an additional argument to insist that all refugees be repatriated – because, given their complicated tribal loyalties, they may constitute a domestic security threat."
"According to tripartite agreements between the governments of Pakistan, Afghanistan, and the United Nations’ refugee agency, UNHCR, four of the largest camps in Pakistan are to be closed and all Afghans living there repatriated."
"While in theory the repatriation should be safe and voluntary, the reality is different."
"Return is often dangerous, and the fact that alternative locations are almost uninhabitable means it is an induced choice."
"After much negotiation, Pakistani authorities agreed to a compromise."
"One camp – Katcha Ghari is already closed and in 2008, only the biggest of the remaining camps – Jalozai, which once had 110,000 inhabitants – would be closed."
"A few days after the deadline of April 15, bulldozers moved in, flattening the shops, previously dismantled by the departing Afghan merchants."
"Returns from Pakistan were at 20,000 persons a week at the beginning of May 2008 and of the 70.000 Afghans who returned since the beginning of the year until end of May, over 50,000 came from Jalozai camp, according to UNHCR data."
"But unless officials of all the countries involved, including the United States, admit that Afghanistan is dangerous and unprepared to absorb the Big Return, they cannot start taking steps to remedy the situation and guarantee that repatriations will be both safe and voluntary."
An Agenda for Europe’s Weary Magician
BRUSSELS – Europe’s leaders will meet again at the end of June.
"The question they must answer this time is not whether they can rescue this or that country, but whether they can rescue the eurozone – if not the European Union in its current form."
"To see why, just review the last 12 months."
"In July 2011, Europe’s leaders agreed on a (limited) restructuring of Greek debt, while at the same time making financial assistance nimbler and cheaper."
"A year later, Greece remains on knife-edge."
"Throughout last autumn, they agonized over the rise of Spanish and Italian bond rates, until finally the European Central Bank decided to administer pain relief in the form of large-scale liquidity provision to banks. But, despite the arrival of new, reform-minded governments in both Italy and Spain, the relief proved short-lived."
"Then, last December, they agreed on a new fiscal treaty, a more robust financial firewall, and new resources for the International Monetary Fund, so that it could intervene on a larger scale. But, by early spring, bond rates for Spain and Italy were again approaching unsustainable levels."
"Finally, earlier this month, they decided to devote €100 billion to help Spain clean up its ailing banks."
The market’s reaction was to send Spanish government bond rates even higher.
"Contrary to some perceptions, Europeans have not remained inactive over the last year. But they have lost their touch."
"Like aging magicians, they still try tricks that used to impress, but that fail to deliver results – or, worse, prove counterproductive."
Meanwhile financial fragmentation within the eurozone continues;
"Spain, and to a lesser extent Italy, suffers a seemingly irresistible rise in borrowing costs; and political strains grow more visible."
"One summit will not result in decisions that take months to prepare. But Europe’s leaders nonetheless have a chance to impress and start turning the tide, provided that they are sufficiently bold, comprehensive, and forward-looking."
Here is a five-point agenda.
1.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Accept a limited renegotiation of the Greek program.
The bomb has not been defused.
"While Greece was having two rounds of elections, its recession deepened and policy action stalled."
"The EU-IMF program is off track, and more focus must be put on growth."
"The EU should streamline and front-load existing transfers to Greece, and it should help to trigger capital injection into state assets slated for privatization."
2.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Agree on a risk-sharing scheme for Spanish banks.
"To lend more to Spain’s government so that it can recapitalize the country’s banks adds to its debt burden and scares markets, which fear future debt restructuring."
To use the partner countries’ taxpayers’ money to rescue Spanish banks is neither economically justified nor politically acceptable.
"Instead, Spain should incur the first losses, and the eurozone’s financial-rescue fund, the European Stability Mechanism, should shoulder an increasing amount of the risk above a certain threshold (say, 5-10% of GDP)."
3.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Map a scheme for a banking union.
"A banking union – consisting of common deposit insurance, supervision, and crisis resolution – would help to avoid the mutual contamination of banks and sovereigns, which is why the idea was endorsed at the recent G-20 summit in Mexico. But it is an ambitious endeavor that cannot be launched overnight."
"If Europe’s leaders want to show that they are seriously considering it, they should agree to launch concrete discussions on key parameters, giving their ministers a mandate to produce results by autumn."
4.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Explore options for Eurobonds.
"Financial assistance can conceivably help Spain, but not Italy."
"If Italy’s situation worsened, debt mutualization in one way or another would ultimately end up being the only alternative to large-scale default. But, while the European Commission has endorsed schemes for partial debt mutualization, there has never been a serious discussion about their conditions and implications."
"Europe’s leaders cannot decide anything at this stage, but they should task a group of “wise men” (and women) to evaluate and report on options by summer’s end."
5.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Create conditions for macroeconomic adjustment.
Southern Europe needs to deflate to restore competitiveness vis-à-vis northern Europe.
"Yet, in addition to being horribly painful, domestic deflation threatens the sustainability of public and private debt."
"With lower nominal income and the same level of debt, the threat of default necessarily increases."
"Northern Europe should temporarily accept somewhat higher inflation, provided price stability is maintained in the eurozone as a whole."
"Fortunately, German policymakers have indicated that they understand this logic."
Leaders must now forge a consensus around it.
"Most importantly, the leaders should break the political deadlock."
Germany does not want closer financial solidarity if not accompanied by political integration.
France wants financial solidarity without closer political integration.
Both camps have stuck to their positions for at least a quarter-century.
It is time to bridge the gap between them.
"The perception that Europeans can agree on abstruse technicalities, but not on essentials, is a fundamental reason why the euro’s magicians are losing their touch."
An Agenda for Growth in Europe
"A recent OECD study reminds us, once again, that per capita income levels are roughly 30% lower in the euro area, as well as in the three largest Continental countries – France, Germany, and Italy – that dominate its performance, than in the United States."
"That gap is likely to widen as Europe’s demographic profile darkens, and if productivity continues to grow more slowly than elsewhere in the industrial economies."
Why have the large European economies failed to catch up with US income levels?
"The bulk of the shortfall is due to less intensive use of labor: employment rates for women and for the oldest and youngest age groups are lower in the euro area than in the US, working hours are far fewer, and, least significantly, unemployment rates are higher."
"Some take consolation from this, viewing it as positive that Europeans prefer leisure to work. But low levels of labor utilization are largely due to heavier income taxes and social security contributions, as well as high social benefit levels introduced at a time when the labor force was growing rapidly and the need to replace involuntary with voluntary unemployment seemed more urgent than today."
These measures will need to be revisited both to increase the supply of labor and to make public finances more sustainable.
"This process is already underway, particularly in Italy and France, through cuts in social security contributions for lower-paid workers, tighter conditions for drawing unemployment benefits, and tax credits for “the working poor.”"
"Since the mid-1990’s, the relative decline in employment in these countries has, indeed, been slightly reversed."
But factors beyond taxes and benefits also contribute to low employment rates in all the three major euro-zone economies: high minimum wages and some features of employment protection legislation slow down the flow of workers through the job market.
"Although a long agenda of reforms is beginning to be tackled, first in Germany and, more recently and cautiously, in France, the results are slow in coming and public understanding of the need for change remains limited."
"Much can be learned from each country’s experience and from that of smaller EU member states, but labor market reforms inevitably have a strong national flavor."
"Employment objectives have been formulated for all EU member states since 1997 in the so-called European Employment Strategy (EES), now part of the “Lisbon Agenda,” the set of goals established to boost EU productivity. But, with the policy instruments for achieving these goals largely national and the arguments for applying them simultaneously in several member states weak, the EES has created unrealistic public expectations and triggered only limited action by governments."
Nor is the employment gap with the US the only problem for Europe.
"Beginning in the mid-1990’s, the rate of growth in output per hour worked – a key factor behind the rise in per capita income – slowed in most European countries while it rose in the US, reversing a decades-long pattern."
"Between 2000 and 2004, hourly labor productivity rose more than twice as fast in the US than in the large euro zone economies – 2.8% per year versus little more than 1%."
So why have the Europeans been unable to sustain improvements in both foundations of growth – employment and productivity – at the same time?
"This proved possible not only in the US, but also in other advanced economies outside Europe – Australia, Canada, and New Zealand – and, unsurprisingly, in the new EU member states."
"The explanation is not capital spending, which is normally linked to productivity growth."
"There have been no major differences between the US and the large euro zone economies here. This leaves the “explanation” to what economists call Total Factor Productivity (TFP), a mix of several important elements, including innovation activity, a well-functioning financial system ready and willing to take risks, and organizational flexibility that facilitates rapid diffusion of new technologies."
"The main lapse in TFP growth in Europe over the past decade has been in services (excluding information and communications technologies). So deregulation and integration of services will be essential if the Euro area’s TFP is to improve, as more than two-thirds of total income in most EU economies is generated in this sector."
"While product markets have held center stage in the creation of the single European market, services continue to be fragmented by national regulatory, anti-competitive practices."
"Much of the explanation lies in the very heterogeneity of services and the greater difficulties that mutual recognition, or the “country-of-origin principle” – essential in the integration of product markets – implies for services."
"Unfortunately, reform was derailed in 2005."
"During the referendum campaign in France preceding the vote on the draft EU Constitutional Treaty, the proposed directive was vilified as undermining the rights of labor, symbolized by that dreaded bogeyman, the “Polish plumber.”"
These attacks overlooked the fact that the directive makes employment conditions of workers from other EU-member states subject in most respects to host-country rules.
A revised version of the directive that reduces its sectoral scope and makes a number of compromises with the country-of-origin principle is now before the European Parliament.
Even this limited version would constitute progress; most of the gains arise from removing the red tape that complicates cross-border establishment of small and medium-size service enterprises and limits competition in broad sectors of the economy.
It is a sad reflection on the state of the EU that it seems unable to agree on the one clear productivity-advancing piece of legislation when improving productivity is held out as a shared goal.
"The failure to mobilize consumer interests in favor of European integration is particularly disappointing for the new member states, which had expected to reap some of the benefits."
An Agenda for Latin America
"During the last three years, Latin America has experienced an economic boom without precedent."
"Growth has been strong, inflation is under control, and international reserves have increased steadily."
The 2004-2006 period has been the best three years for Latin America’s economies since the early 1960’s.
This bonanza has largely been the result of an extraordinarily positive international environment.
"Commodity export prices are at record levels, global liquidity has been ample, and international interest rates have been low."
"Yet, despite this good news, the continent’s politics have turned upside down, calling into question whether economic success can be sustained."
An increasing number of Latin American countries have elected left-wing presidents who criticize market reforms and globalization.
"Colombia recently bucked this trend, and it now appears that the leftist candidate in Mexico’s presidential election, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, was narrowly defeated."
"But voters have catapulted left-wing politicians to power in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela, and Uruguay, while López retains the ability – and perhaps the will – to mobilize his supporters."
"The main concern is that left-wing politicians will implement populist policies that will generate large fiscal deficits, high inflation, and, eventually, currency collapses."
External crises have a long history in the region.
"Since the 1970’s, Latin American countries have experienced, on average, 1.6 balance of payments crises per decade; some of the better known include the Mexican crisis of 1994-95, the Brazilian crisis of 1999, and the Argentine crisis of 2001-2002."
The economic consequences of these crises have been gigantic.
"On average, each of them cost the Latin American countries 12% of GDP."
"However, concern about populist policies is not fully justified."
The current crop of left-wing political leaders is different from the populist “
"Moreover, in recent years, Latin American economies have gone through important economic transformations that have increased their resilience."
"Chief among these changes has been the adoption, in most countries, of flexible exchange rates and reduction of external debt, particularly government debt."
"These structural changes have put most Latin American economies on a sound footing, reducing their vulnerability to external shocks, such as deceleration in world economic growth, higher international interest rates, and lower commodity prices."
But greater macroeconomic stability does not mean that everything is fine.
The main weakness of Latin America’s economies is that they will be unable to generate the type of rapid and sustained growth required to create jobs and reduce inequality and poverty.
Generating the rapid long-term economic growth that Latin American countries need requires that they fulfill three conditions.
"First, they must accumulate capital, which implies a high savings rate that will help pay for new machines, equipment, and infrastructure."
"Second, they need to use their workforces efficiently, which requires modern labor legislation that encourages employment of women, the young, and senior citizens."
"Finally, they need to attain a rapid rate of productivity growth, which can be achieved only by ensuring a high-quality, broadly accessible educational system."
The vast majority of Latin America countries do not fulfill any of these requirements.
"At 19% of GDP, national savings rates are very low – indeed, much lower than in Asia – and labor legislation is antiquated, discouraging efficient use of human capital, while productivity growth is meager."
"Indeed, students from Latin American countries consistently score at the very bottom of international achievement tests such as the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) and the Third International Math and Science Survey (TIMSS)."
"The main challenge for Latin America’s new leaders, whether of the left or the right, is to implement reforms that will accelerate growth."
"The continent needs measures that are designed to encourage savings and investment, improve labor utilization, and upgrade failed educational systems."
Only if growth is significantly faster over the long run will living standards for the vast majority of the region’s voters begin to rise.
An Agenda for the Group of 7
An Age of Diminished Expectations?
"CAMBRIDGE – As the United States and European economies continue to struggle, there is rising concern that they face a Japanese-style “lost decade.”"
"Unfortunately, far too much discussion has centered on what governments can do to stimulate demand through budget deficits and monetary policy."
"These are key issues in the short term, but, as every economist knows, long-run economic growth is determined mainly by improving productivity."
"There is no doubt that Japan’s massive 1992 financial crisis was a hammer blow, from which it has yet to recover, and the parallels with the US and Europe today are worrisome."
"Both seem set for a long period of slow credit growth, owing both to necessary stricter financial regulation and to the fact that their economies remain significantly over-leveraged."
There are no simple shortcuts in the healing process.
"Yet, in assessing the Japanese experience and its relevance today, it is important to recognize that Japan’s fall to earth was due not only to its financial crisis."
"Japan also suffered a number of severe productivity shocks, which had much to do with its longer-term problems."
"Even if Japan had never experienced a real-estate and stock-market bubble, the meteoric rise of its giant neighbor China would have been a huge challenge."
"At the dawn of the 1990’s, Japan’s dominance in export markets worldwide had already been dented somewhat by the rise of its smaller Asian neighbors, including Malaysia, Korea, Thailand, and Singapore. But China presents an entirely different challenge, one for which adjustment will take much longer."
"Moreover, even if it never had a financial crisis, Japan would have been plagued by adverse demographics, as its population is both aging and shrinking."
"Last but not least, Japan’s hyper-growth years were built on a phenomenal rate of investment. But, because productivity ultimately must be built on innovation, not just on ever more buildings and equipment, it was inevitable that returns on investment would turn south at some point."
"In principle, with a healthier financial system, Japan’s economy would have had more flexibility to meet these challenges to its productivity growth. But, one way or another, Japan’s once sky-high growth rates probably would have fallen sharply."
"As is usually the case, financial crisis amplified other causes of economic meltdown, rather than igniting it directly."
The US Great Depression of the 1930’s is another case in point.
"Again, a great deal of attention has been lavished on the ebbs and flow of fiscal and monetary policy. But New Deal economic policies, by expanding the role of the state in an often chaotic and unpredictable fashion, probably also played a role in at least temporarily impeding productivity growth."
"The US today seems to be moving towards a gentler and more European-style state, with higher taxes and possibly greater regulation."
"Supporters of the US administration might fairly argue that it is undertaking long-deferred maintenance on issues such as income inequality. But if the US does experience slow growth over the next decade, can it all be blamed on the financial crisis?"
"Likewise, Europe’s latest existential identity crisis is again creating a great deal of policy uncertainty and unpredictability."
"In Europe, too, if there are adverse growth effects over the next decade, they cannot all be blamed on the financial crisis."
"In the short term, it is important that monetary policy in the US and Europe vigilantly fight Japanese-style deflation, which would only exacerbate debt problems by lowering incomes relative to debts."
"In fact, as I argued at the outset of the crisis, it would be far better to have two or three years of mildly elevated inflation, deflating debts across the board, especially if the political, legal, and regulatory systems remain somewhat paralyzed in achieving the necessary write-downs."
"With credit markets impaired, further quantitative easing may still be needed."
"As for fiscal policy, it is already in high gear and needs gradual tightening over several years, lest already troubling government-debt levels deteriorate even faster."
"Those who believe – often with quasi-religious conviction – that we need even more Keynesian fiscal stimulus, and should ignore government debt, seem to me to be panicking."
"Last but not least, however, it is important to try to preserve dynamism in the US and European economies through productivity-enhancing measures – for example, by being vigilant about anti-trust policy, and by streamlining and simplifying tax systems."
"For better or for worse, productivity trends are very difficult to extrapolate, depending as they do on hugely complex interactions of social, economic, and political forces."
Nobel Prize winners Robert Solow and Paul Krugman famously once questioned whether the proliferation of computers and technology would lead to bottom-line growth.
(This theme underlies the title of Krugman’s classic 1990 book “The Age of Diminished Expectations.”)
"In the end, policymakers must remember that whether or not the US and Europe avoid a lost decade depends on their ability to retain productive vitality in their economies, not simply on short-term demand-stimulation measures."
An Alliance of Civilizations?
"MADRID – The first International Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations, conceived as an antidote to the idea that the world is doomed to a “clash of civilizations,” recently met in Madrid and revealed that there is more than a grain of truth in Robert Kagan’s idea that Americans are from Mars and Europeans from Venus."
"Ever since September 11, 2001, the United States has been engaged in a crusade against the forces of evil in the Muslim world."
"By contrast, the March 11, 2004, terrorist attack on Spain, which left 200 dead, triggered an “anti-crusade” that seeks to disarm extremism by building bridges of understanding and reconciliation with Islam."
"Co-sponsored by Spain and Turkey, the Alliance of Civilizations initiative is not devoid of political calculation."
"To the Spaniards, it helps to justify their abrupt withdrawal from Iraq in 2004; for the Turks, it is yet another vehicle in their struggle, as the vital bridge between Islam and the West, for admission into the European Union."
"A loose and somewhat confused project, the Alliance of Civilizations aims to heal the wounds of conflict between Islam and the West through education, viable integration policies, and a better-informed dialogue with the media."
"But it suffers from the major global players’ profound skepticism, with the US, Russia, and, for that matter, the EU shown no real enthusiasm for it."
"However vague, the alliance of civilizations idea certainly cannot do more harm than war against Islamic extremism."
"After all, none of the Muslim world’s problems and conflicts with the West are susceptible to a military solution."
"Moreover, the Alliance is not an entirely incoherent proposal if the objective is that the West disengage from the politics of hubris and establish a genuine sphere of cooperation with the Muslim world in economics, culture, and science."
"Of course, the idea is held back by the inner workings of both parts of the proposed alliance."
Many in the West question whether Islam is compatible with human rights and Western concepts of liberty.
Many Muslims who have been fighting for years for their countries’ modernization have so far failed to find a lucid response to the progressive wave of radical Islam.
To claim that Islam is incompatible with human rights is to consider it a civilization too hidebound to change.
This is a historic fallacy.
"Nor is the claim that Islam is intrinsically inimical to innovation viable, because Muslim civilization has contributed mightily to science and art throughout history."
"Today, Western universities are replete with distinguished Arab scholars in almost every field – the result of a brain drain that itself reflects the Islamic world’s centuries of decline."
"In 2005, the 17 countries of the Arab world together produced 13,444 scientific publications, fewer than the 15,455 achieved by Harvard University alone."
"Enemies of reason, however, are also to be found in the West."
"We live in an age in which many people are disillusioned with secular politics, and are turning to religion instead, not only throughout the Muslim world, but in the core of Western civilization, Christian Europe and Evangelist America."
"Nor is the Jewish state of Israel, where Messianic fanatics and religious nationalists have embraced a political theology that questions the very legitimacy of the democratic institutions, immune from this phenomenon."
"The current crisis of Islam might not be congenital, but Islam’s predicament is acute."
"The question is this: are Muslims ready to accept that Khomeini’s dictum that “Islam is politics or it is nothing” is wrong, that Islam is a religion and not a form of government, and that, as in the Christian world, there is a sphere for Caesar and a sphere for God?"
Those in the Muslim world who want to embrace reform must be driven by the conviction that theocracy has never served as a vehicle for human progress.
"Of course, the Alliance of Civilizations should not attempt to bridge differences by defending moral relativism."
"If it is driven by a Western guilt complex that assumes that the solution simply lies in greater empathy for the Muslim predicament, then the skeptics are bound to be vindicated."
"For the Alliance of Civilizations to have any chance of success, the emphasis must be on reciprocity. Tolerance and religious freedom must be mutual."
"Islam’s part in the deal must include a guarantee of human rights and civil liberties, improvement in women’s status, and realistic policies to stem the Islamic world’s demographic explosion."
"Some, as usual, will claim that the Arab-Israeli conflict lies at the root of the problems that exist between Islam and the West, and that resolving the Palestinians’ plight will contribute immensely to smoother relations."
But Arabs and Muslims must stop deluding themselves that the Israel-Palestine dispute is what is holding them back.
"Ending the American occupation in Iraq and imposing an Arab-Israeli peace would help, but they are no panacea."
"The fight to eradicate misery, illiteracy, and corruption, and Islam’s embrace of science, do not depend on the results of the Middle East peace process."
An Alliance of Equal
"PARIS – During NATO’s recent 60th anniversary ceremony in Strasbourg, the Alliance welcomed two new members, Albania and Croatia, bringing its total membership to 28."
"This expansion is a good thing, for history has tormented these two countries."
"Being welcomed within the great international family of the West will reassure them, stabilize them, and contribute to their political, cultural, and economic development."
"But the good news was limited, because NATO addressed only a routine agenda."
No core problem was really tackled.
The controversy that arose in France over the country’s return to NATO’s unified military command makes this abundantly clear.
"Was France losing its autonomy, perhaps even its sovereignty?"
Was it capitulating to American hegemony?
"These are real questions, yet at the NATO summit people spoke of them more in terms of symbols than as realities."
But what is the reality here?
NATO is a military alliance composed of 28 countries.
"One of them, the United States, has a military budget that is more than three times that of all the other members combined."
"Hence, the US runs most NATO civilian and military commands with the consent of the others."
"Of course, there is a collective consultation and deliberative process that enables any member to be heard."
But in reality a member’s actual power is what affects common decisions.
"This structure harks back to the conditions of NATO’s birth, when it was forged to thwart the Soviet threat to Western civilization."
"At the time, no one ever doubted that American power – already endowed with nuclear weapons – was the only counterpart."
"For this reason, the US came to preside over the alliance."
"During the 41 years of the Cold War, 14 of NATO’s 16 members strictly obeyed and complied with American decisions and policies."
French President Charles de Gaulle was the only one to question whether an American president would actually ever be ready to launch a nuclear attack on the USSR in order to protect one or several Alliance members if vital US interests were not directly at stake.
"Based on that doubt, France – a nuclear power since 1960 – withdrew in 1966 from the Alliance’s permanent centralized military command in order to assert its own deterrent capability."
"This decision was mainly grounded on the American doctrine, adopted in 1962, of “flexible response,” which said to the Soviets: “As long as you do not use nuclear weapons, we will not use them, either.”"
This very doctrine left Europe exposed.
"Indeed, while it is a much disputed question, de Gaulle was probably right about America’s lack of commitment to the nuclear defense of Europe."
Both Henry Kissinger and Robert McNamara left office admitting that de Gaulle had been correct.
"Nevertheless, de Gaulle’s insights left a legacy that still causes some mistrust and dissent within NATO."
"France was right on this key strategic point, but it was never able to explain its position to its allies."
"This inability to discuss, clearly and forthrightly, this strategic doctrine continues to hamper the Alliance."
"At the Strasbourg summit, confidence in the future could have been strengthened if a couple of troubling issues had been discussed."
"Instead, once again, there was an extended focus on the past."
"The key questions are whether NATO’s doctrine of common defense is currently directed at one country in particular, and whether nuclear force remains the Alliance’s major defensive tool."
"In the current global situation, no predictable conflict will require the use of a nuclear weapon."
"At the moment, there is no global threat and the Alliance only intervenes in regional conflicts, so why not have NATO admit this?"
But the most important matter that went unmentioned in Strasbourg is the relationship with Russia.
NATO was founded to confront the threat that the USSR represented 60 years ago.
"But the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet Union’s “anti-NATO” alliance of socialist countries, was dissolved in 1991; communism imploded the same year, with Russia caught ever since in a struggle to build a market economy and define a new global position for itself."
"At a time when Russia was taking a more pacific course, NATO – unlike the Warsaw Pact – was not dismantled."
"On the contrary, the Allies chose to maintain the pact and to extend it to numerous Russian neighbors."
NATO’s members essentially said: “We Western nations do not trust you.
"Even if you become a democracy, we will always be suspicious.”"
"George Kennan, one of the greatest American diplomats of the post-war years, once wrote that the Western world was committing its biggest mistake in 50 years time by expanding NATO after Soviet communism collapsed."
The resulting humiliation and blatant mistrust that Russia’s elite has felt ever since has led them to their current policy of rearmament.
The only way to resolve this problem is for NATO to assert its pacific intentions before the world.
"The most convincing way to do that is to moderate America’s excessive taste for power, which it demonstrated in Iraq."
NATO needs to shift its focus from organizing and administering a unified military command to building real confidence that every member’s voice will be heard.
"To that end, all members must stand on an equal footing."
"France’s decision to return to full and equal Alliance membership was a good one, and France must now work from within to advance the principles in which it believes."
Avoiding a New American Recession
CAMBRIDGE – The United States may be headed for a recession in 2013.
"Even if the country avoids going over the “fiscal cliff,” a poorly designed political compromise that cuts the deficit too quickly could push an already weak economy into recession."
"But a gradual phase-in of an overall cap on tax deductions and exclusions (so-called tax expenditures), combined with reform of entitlement spending, could achieve the long-run fiscal consolidation that America needs without risking a new recession."
"The US economy has been limping along with a growth rate of less than 2% during the past year, with similarly dim prospects in 2013, even without the shock of the fiscal cliff.&#160;"
"That is much too weak a pace of expansion to tolerate the fiscal cliff’s increase in tax rates and spending cuts, which would reduce demand by a total of $600 billion – about 4% of GDP – next year, and by larger sums in subsequent years."
"President Barack Obama’s proposed alternative to the fiscal cliff would substantially increase tax rates and limit tax deductions for the top 2% of earners, who now pay more than 45% of total federal personal-income taxes."
"His budget would also increase taxes on corporations, and would end the current payroll-tax “holiday,” imposing an additional 2% tax on all wage earners."
"Together, these changes could lower total demand by nearly 2% of GDP."
"And the higher marginal tax rates would reduce incentives to work and to invest, further impeding economic activity."
All of that could be fateful for an economy that is still struggling to sustain a growth rate of less than 2%.
"The Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Reserve predict that going over the fiscal cliff would cause a recession in 2013, with Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke recently saying that the Fed would be unable to offset the adverse effect on the economy."
He could have said the same thing about the fiscal drag that would be created by Obama’s budget proposal.
"Although Congressional Republicans rightly object to raising tax rates, they appear willing to raise revenue through tax reform if that is part of a deal that also includes reductions in the long-run cost of the major entitlement programs, Medicare and Social Security."
"Although some Republicans would like to see revenue increased only by stimulating faster economic growth, that cannot be achieved without the reductions in marginal tax rates and improvements in corporate taxation that the Democrats are unlikely to accept."
Raising revenue through tax reform will have to mean reducing the special deductions and exclusions that now lower tax receipts.
The potential recession risk of a budget deal can be avoided by phasing in the base-broadening that is used to raise revenue.
A desirable way to broaden the tax base would be to put an overall cap on the amount of tax reduction that each taxpayer can achieve through deductions and exclusions.
Such an overall cap would allow each taxpayer to retain all of his existing deductions and exclusions but would limit the amount by which he could reduce his tax liability in this way.
An overall cap would also cause many individuals who now itemize deductions to shift to the standard deduction – implying significant simplification in record-keeping and thus an improvement in incentives.
A cap on the tax reductions derived from tax expenditures that is equal to 2% of each individual’s adjusted gross income would raise more than $200 billion in 2013 if applied to all of the current deductions and to the exclusions for municipal-bond interest and employer-paid health insurance.
"Even if the full deduction for charitable gifts is preserved and only high-value health insurance is regarded as a tax expenditure, the extra revenue in 2013 would be about $150 billion."
"Over a decade, that implies nearly $2 trillion in additional revenue without any increase in tax rates from today’s levels."
"Extra revenue of $150 billion in 2013 would be 1% of GDP, and could be too much for the economy to swallow, particularly if combined with reductions in government spending and a rise in the payroll tax."
But the same basic framework could be used by starting with a higher cap and gradually reducing it over several years.
"A 5% cap on the tax-expenditure benefits would raise only $75 billion in 2013, about 0.5% of GDP; but the cap could be reduced from 5% to 2% over the next few years, raising substantially more revenue when the economy is stronger."
Slowing the growth of government spending for Medicare and Social Security is necessary to prevent a long-term explosion of the national debt or dramatic increases in personal tax rates.
Those changes should also be phased in gradually to protect beneficiaries and avoid an economic downturn.
"America’s national debt has more than doubled in the past five years, and is set to rise to more than 100% of GDP over the next decade unless changes in spending and taxes are implemented."
A well-designed combination of caps to limit tax expenditures and a gradual slowing of growth in outlays for entitlement programs could reverse the rise in the debt and strengthen the US economy.
"America’s current budget negotiations should focus on achieving a credible long-term decline in the national debt, while protecting economic expansion in the near term."
An Alternative to Deposit Insurance
"Argentina's financial panic and the run on its banks that ensued, as well as Asia's financial crisis of 1997, have forced a number of countries to consider adopting deposit insurance schemes to protect their citizens' savings."
But is deposit insurance the best defense against bank panics?
Deposit insurance was a response to banking crises of the type that plagued the United States until the 1930's.
The first explicit scheme was introduced in America after the Great Depression and initially seemed an unmitigated success.
"Panics no longer occurred, which stabilized the financial system and contributed to sustained post-war economic growth."
Deposit insurance did away with financial panics because bank runs are typically driven by a self-fulfilling prophecy.
They occur when a bank's clients fear that most of their fellow depositors will withdraw their funds.
"Because banks service their depositors on a first-come-first-served basis, those who wait risk being left empty-handed, because the bank may be forced to liquidate its long term-assets at a loss and run out of resources."
So fear of a panic can create a panic.
"This is highly inefficient, because while it is individually rational for depositors to want their money immediately, the bank might have been able to service all of them had they been collectively patient."
"Economists call such situations ""coordination failures,"" if depositors could talk to each other and coordinate their actions, they would be able to avoid a self-defeating run on the bank."
"By guaranteeing that there will be enough resources available for patient clients when they want to withdraw their funds, deposit insurance eliminates the coordination failure."
Patient depositors no longer need to worry about others withdrawing their funds because it has no effect on them.
"But deposit insurance leads to other problems, which first appeared with the Savings and Loan crisis in the US during the 1980's."
"Deposit insurance creates what economists call ""moral hazard,"" people who are insured against an unpleasant event are not as careful as they would otherwise be in trying to avoid that event."
"If my bicycle is insured against theft, I might buy a cheaper lock for it, making it more likely that it will be stolen."
"With deposit insurance, clients who no longer risk losing their money have no incentive to monitor their bank, while banks, with no one watching, have incentives to invest in excessively risky projects."
"Although many factors contributed to the Savings and Loan crisis, it is generally agreed that moral hazard was a major one. Following that crisis, deposit insurance in the US was reformed with the objective of mitigating the moral hazard problem."
"As far back as 1873, in his classic book on central banking,"
"In case of panic, a good policy should help banks that have enough assets to cover their deposits but that can't pay all depositors at the same time because some assets are tied up in real estate or other long-term investments. These banks are"
"As with deposit insurance, repurchase agreements solve the coordination failure problem because depositors know that, even if they wait, the bank will be able to accommodate their withdrawals."
"In contrast to deposit insurance, however, liquidity provision can avoid moral hazard by helping"
Consider a bank that has invested in risky projects and finds itself in trouble.
It can ask the central bank for help and sell some of its assets for cash.
"However, under the agreement with the central bank, it must buy its assets back."
"If the assets are worthless, it will ultimately be forced out of business."
"If it declares bankruptcy and refuses to buy back its assets, bankruptcy laws should give the central bank the first claim on the bank's assets."
This creates a powerful incentive for depositors and investors to monitor their bank's performance.
Implementing liquidity provision policies like those advocated by Bagehot would prevent bank panics without the incentive for undue risk-taking associated with deposit insurance.
"Depositors deserve strong, effective protection for their funds--and the banking system requires it in order to maintain confidence."
But neither depositors nor their banks should be given a free ride.
An Alternative To Invading Iraq?
"Now that the UN inspection teams are in Iraq, and as the December 8 deadline approaches for Iraq to declare all its weapons of mass destruction and the facilities for producing them, the world must reckon with a hard question: what is to be done if Saddam Hussein does not obey the Security Council resolution on his weapons of mass destruction?"
"There is a chance that the Iraqi president will comply, but the Council promised ""serious consequences"" if he does not."
What should these be?
We know from experience that neither political pressures nor economic sanctions hurt Saddam enough.
Only military action will do.
"But the only military option so far put before us is invasion to change the regime - that is, full-scale war."
"Starting a war is always a grave step, and the effects are never neatly calculable."
In this instance five key areas of uncertainty and risk exist.
"First, the fighting itself may not be the cakewalk that some assert."
"Churchill once wrote: ""Never, never, never assume that any war will be smooth and easy."""
"Brainwashed Iraqi forces, and a regime complicit at every level in Saddam's crimes, would be fighting not to hang on to a conquest (as in the Gulf War of 1991) but to defend their homeland."
"This raises the spectre of street fighting through Baghdad, desperate use of biological or chemical weapons, an attack to draw in Israel, numerous military and civilian deaths and the further destruction of a ravaged society."
"Second, Iraq is a diverse country, distorted by over thirty years of Saddam's tyranny, and with no plausible and coherent alternative government in sight."
How would it be run?
WWII's victors had to rule Germany for four years and Japan for longer.
"According to the New York Times , Pentagon officials have said, ""thousands of military specialists in civil affairs familiar with the linguistic and cultural differences within Iraq would probably be deployed throughout the country""."
Where is this remarkable cohort to come from?
"Next, no government in the region loves Saddam, but all fear popular reaction to a third Western onslaught on an Islamic state, this time with much less clear justification than over Kuwait and in Afghanistan."
Some hawks might welcome the destabilisation of Saudi Arabia.
Should anyone else?
"Indeed, the fourth dimension of risk is that an invasion could weaken the support of key governments for action against terrorists, and provoke further outrages."
"Fifth, the world economy is scarcely thriving."
Would unrest in the main oil-producing region help or hinder prosperity?
What would the whole enterprise cost?
"Explicit UN support for invasion might ease some of these risks, but it would not remove them."
"Necessity sometimes dictates that risks be accepted, as Britain did in 1939. But does necessity really drive us so hard now?"
Three main reasons for acting against Saddam have been offered.
We need no longer address the first - that he was behind the attacks of September 2001 on the US.
The Bush Administration makes no claim to have adequate evidence of this.
The second reason adduced is that Saddam poses a grave security threat to the US and to his region.
But his two aggressive adventures - the more recent over twelve years ago - ended in humiliating failure.
"He is weaker militarily now than then, he cannot hit the US directly, and he must know that fresh aggression would bring the house down upon him."
Saddam's only option would be to provide weapons of mass destruction to terrorists.
But that would be so uncontrollable and dangerous for him as to be deeply implausible - unless we drive him to desperation.
"Saddam Hussein heads a state, not a shadowy terrorist outfit."
"Deterrence - which works by basic human nature, not through some arcane construct peculiar to the Cold War - can be brought to bear here."
The third reason for acting against Saddam is cogent: that his defiance of the Security Council since 1991 cannot be allowed to stand.
The Council has now made that plain.
"Yet we must still ask whether a full-scale invasion is the only way, a necessary and proportionate way, to fulfil that aim."
"We should not forswear that option, but we ought to consider others, not least because the Security Council - whose backing will be politically if not legally crucial - may never support invasion."
It would be odd to uphold the Council's authority by means that failed to get its approval.
"The Council is more likely to accept an option of mounting a punitive program of air strikes - going well beyond what was done in 1998 - on suspected WMD sites, presidential compounds, the Republican Guard and other armed-force targets."
"This would hurt and weaken Saddam, and establish unmistakably the message that defiance of the UN carries severe penalties."
"The Council could also declare that any fresh aggression, or any use, threat or transfer of WMD, would trigger Saddam's removal and his pursuit as an international criminal like Slobodan Milosevic."
"Such a course would not please those whose underlying desire is regime change, not disarmament or punishment."
The US has skilfully carried the international community along with it so far.
To throw away that achievement would impose costs not confined to the present episode.
The sledgehammer of invasion could easily cause far more harm than the ills it seeks to stamp out.
"Dealing with Saddam does not need, and is not worth, a full-scale war."
An Arab “Third Way”
"AMMAN – Throughout the post-colonial period, Arab countries have consistently failed to produce an efficient – let alone democratic – system of government."
"Now, after a half-century of competition between military or royal dictatorships and militant Islamist regimes, many Arabs are again seeking a “third way” – a path toward a credible form of representative democracy."
But will their efforts prove as futile now as they have in the past?
"The Middle East – named for its geographic position between Europe and East Asia – was under Ottoman rule for 400 years before the Allied powers, after defeating the Ottomans in World War I, partitioned the region into distinct political units that, under the Sykes-Picot Agreement, fell within spheres of influence carved out by the United Kingdom and France."
"But, in response to these new divisions, an Arab awakening – shaped by pan-Arabism and support for Palestine – was occurring."
"Charismatic young military rulers-turned-dictators like Egypt’s Gamal Abdel Nasser, Iraq’s Saddam Hussein, Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi, Yemen’s Ali Abdullah Saleh, and Syria’s Hafez al-Assad used these popular causes to win public support."
"But their failure to deliver better lives to their citizens, together with the discrediting of left-wing ideologies following the Soviet Union’s collapse, fueled the rise of a rival movement: political Islam."
"The Muslim Brotherhood – established in the Egyptian town of Ismailia in 1928 and political Islam’s oldest, best organized, and most widespread proponent – was (and is) despised by both secular Arabs and Arab monarchies."
"Indeed, secular dictators have worked to suppress the Brothers at every turn – often violently, as when Assad ruthlessly crushed a Brotherhood-led uprising in Hama in 1982."
"Forced to operate clandestinely, the Brotherhood built its support base with a social agenda that targeted the needs of the poor, while consistently reinforcing its Islamic ties, even using the compulsory zakat (annual financial contribution to religious causes) to build up its social network."
"The Brothers, with the help of a conservative society and the mosques, were prepared to seize power whenever the opportunity arose."
"Another Islamist movement, Algeria’s Islamic Salvation Front, almost had such an opportunity in 1991, when it won the first round of a general election."
"But the military prevented its victory by canceling the second round, triggering a brutal eight-year civil war in which an estimated 200,000 people died."
"Palestine’s Hamas, an offshoot of the Brotherhood, succeeded at the ballot box in 2006, but has since failed to deliver credible governance."
"Then the Arab Spring erupted in 2011, creating new opportunities for political renewal."
"Within months, Islamist parties shaped by the Brotherhood’s ideology had replaced secular dictators in Tunisia and Egypt, and seemed poised to take over Yemen and Syria, largely because they were the only well-organized political movements on the scene."
"Moreover, the Muslim Brotherhood gained control of Egypt, the largest and most influential of the Arab Spring countries."
"But their exclusive, rigid ideology was poorly suited to governing such a large and diverse country."
"As a result, after only a year in power, the military – backed by the same secular, liberal young people who had opposed it in 2011 – drove President Mohamed Morsi out of power."
"Unable to mount a political alternative, however, the protesters’ rejection of the Islamist government served only to put the army back in charge."
Some argue that the absence of a secular liberal option in Arab politics stems from fear of political Islam.
"For decades, Western powers backed military regimes in the Arab world, willingly ignoring their systematic repression of democratic movements and rights, in order to ensure that Islamists did not gain power."
"Now that both the military- and Islamist-led systems have been discredited, an ideological vacuum has appeared in Arab politics."
But Arabs today – most of whom are under the age of 30 – are less interested in an overarching political ideology than they are in an efficient representative government that implements sound policies aimed at creating jobs and bolstering economic growth.
"In short, they want a government that is focused on improving citizens’ lives."
"In fact, the absence of a specific ideology was essential to the Arab Spring’s initial success in Egypt and Tunisia, for it allowed a large number of young activists to forge loose alliances."
But mass movements can take a country only so far; establishing a credible representative government requires political parties organized around clearly defined principles.
"While the Muslim Brotherhood has such an organizing principle, its internal rigidity – at least with Morsi at its helm – made it unfit to govern."
"Meanwhile, infighting among Egypt’s liberals prevented them from establishing a disciplined, reliable alternative to the Brotherhood based on principles like diversity, plurality, respect for women, and freedom of expression."
"So when the Islamist government’s credibility collapsed, the military was Egypt’s only remaining option."
"In order to make progress, the youth-led movements that drove the Arab Spring must translate their shared principles into effective political structures, and choose leaders who are capable of placing the search for consensus ahead of personal ambition."
"If they succeed, the Arab world may finally have an alternative to rule by generals or mullahs."
"Even if they fail to gain power, the emergence of such an alternative would surely influence the Arab world’s agenda for years to come."
The Uses of Nuclear Ambition
"MADRID – The agreement reached in Geneva in the wee hours of November 24 between Iran and the P5+1 (the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, plus Germany) on Iran’s nuclear program proves a crucially important point: the sanctions regime worked."
"The interim deal is Iran’s first compromise on its nuclear program in more than a decade, and a diplomatic victory in a field long overshadowed by the looming cloud of military intervention."
Yet the euphoric reaction seen in some quarters is misplaced.
"Beyond the ambiguities and limitations of the six-month agreement, the negotiations have clearly exposed Iran’s nuclear-weapons program and, more broadly, its understanding that nuclear weapons remain a geostrategic status symbol."
This points to the difficulty of achieving a comprehensive agreement and the possibility that the international effort could result only in a series of small deals aimed at delaying Iran’s acquisition of a nuclear weapon rather than removing the threat of it altogether.
Beneath the headlines of the historic deal lies a limited and ambiguous agreement.
The joint statement released by European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton and Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif referred to the agreement as “a joint plan of action” that “sets out an approach toward reaching a long-term comprehensive solution.”
"While it includes a first step that “creates the time and environment needed for a comprehensive solution,” the interim accord is really about confidence-building measures. Indeed, the obligations that it lists are referred to as “voluntary measures.”"
"At best, the agreement maintains the current status quo, and in some respects even allows for further development of Iran’s nuclear program."
"In this sense, perhaps the most troubling aspect of the interim deal concerns Iran’s yet-to-be-opened Arak plant, which would offer a path to domestic plutonium production and weaponization."
"Though the agreement reached in Geneva includes Iran’s pledge not to transfer fuel or heavy water or commission its Arak reactor, there does not appear to be any overarching moratorium on construction at the site."
"According to the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Arak plant still lacks several major reactor components, such as control-room equipment and cooling pumps."
"So, Iran, it seems, will be able to advance its plutonium program during the six-month confidence-building period."
That loophole is all the more troubling in light of French press reports this week concerning Western intelligence on the construction of facilities in Shiraz that may be used to separate plutonium in order to create the fissile material needed for nuclear weapons.
That Iran’s push to acquire the capacity to produce nuclear weapons is partly motivated by security concerns cannot be denied.
"Nationalism, however, is a more important factor."
"It is not just that all the great powers have nuclear weapons; the problem, from Iran’s perspective, is that lesser powers – particularly neighboring states such as Pakistan and Israel – have them."
"The Iranians regard themselves as the heirs to a great and ancient civilization, and their ambition of achieving regional preeminence reflects this. At the same time, they perceive their country to be marginalized, discriminated against, and the target of aggressive international condemnation."
"Nearly 70 years after the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the view persists globally that gaining a seat at the grownup table of geopolitics requires nuclear weapons."
"Germany is an exception, though hardly a geostrategic heavyweight; and though Japan knows the horror of nuclear war, important domestic voices there are calling for a change of its non-nuclear status."
"This view of nuclear weapons as a shorthand for national greatness is reinforced by the architecture of the non-proliferation regime, which firmly divides states into two camps: nuclear haves and have-nots."
"That nuclear chauvinism is an attitude reinforced by the “haves” of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty – China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States – which also constitute the P5."
"As long as possessing nuclear weapons remains a state’s clearest way to demonstrate its bona fides as a great power, maintaining the potential to develop such weapons will be too tempting for countries like Iran to forswear."
What is needed is a global shift away from the equation of nuclear weapons with geopolitical greatness.
"Progress on various efforts to sever this link have not been very encouraging, as was recently demonstrated by the Kremlin’s negative reaction to US President Barack Obama’s proposal that both sides cut their nuclear stockpiles."
"Meanwhile, non-P5 nuclear-weapons states continue to expand their arsenals, with Pakistan and India estimated to have nearly tripled their stockpiles during the past decade."
The interim agreement with Iran marks an important juncture.
"Above all, it shows that international sanctions can bear fruit, and that a diplomatic way forward – even if proves to be a narrow one – is possible."
We can remain both ambitious and realistic.
But a comprehensive deal with Iran – and the need to preempt future epigones – requires a broader change: a world that not only excludes the offensive use of nuclear weapons but also acknowledges the ultimate unsustainability of their deterrent power.
Insecure Europe
"MADRID – For the last five years, Europe has been shaken by financial and economic convulsions that have wreaked havoc on many of its citizens’ livelihoods."
"The good news is that progress is finally being made in redeveloping the European Union’s economic and monetary architecture, which should help to bring about a return to growth."
"But EU leaders’ focus on internal problems has caused them largely to neglect external policies, particularly in the area of security."
"As 2014 begins, economic insecurity is giving way to worries about the EU’s strategic position."
"There were expectations that the European Council’s December meeting would signal a return to a more outward-looking approach, especially on security matters."
"Unfortunately, these hopes were quickly dashed. Indeed, the disparate assortment of initiatives that were agreed at the meeting, though interesting, lack the needed breadth and scope, and will have to be integrated within a weak and outdated strategic framework."
"The flawed nature of the current European Security Strategy – drafted in 2003, with a token revision in 2008 – reflects the circumstances surrounding its conception."
"The ESS was developed in the aftermath of the Iraq war, amid heated debate over a proposed European constitution, in a hasty and reactive process hijacked by those who sought to position Europe as a counterweight – or even a rival power – to the United States."
"Making matters worse, the geopolitical environment has changed fundamentally in the decade since the ESS was ratified, owing to economic rebalancing toward Asia, the upheavals in the Arab world, the revival of Russian assertiveness, and the rise of isolationist tendencies in the US."
"As a result, the ESS does not capture the reality of today’s world – a fact that is obvious from its opening declaration that “Europe has never been so prosperous.”"
"To be sure, the ESS’s three basic tenets – development assistance, soft power, and effective multilateralism – remain important."
But Europe’s leaders must reconceive these concepts in light of today’s challenges.
"In terms of development, Europe must move away from the idea that aid should be used to bolster trade linkages and acknowledge the importance of foreign investment."
"In fact, net private capital flows to developing countries now outweigh official development assistance by nearly ten to one worldwide."
"As the world’s second-largest source of foreign direct investment, the EU wields considerable influence, with European investors bringing credibility to projects and regions, thereby serving to attract further investment."
"For example, Morocco’s Ouarzazate Solar Power Plant and its Drinking Water Efficiency Program were launched with €37 million ($50.6 million) from the EU’s Neighborhood Investment Facility; these projects subsequently gained additional funding totaling more than €600 million."
The ESS’s emphasis on soft power is also in urgent need of reassessment.
"The upsurge of protest across the Arab world raised expectations among Europeans that these countries would, to some extent, emulate Western institutions, values, and norms."
"But, while that did not occur, European principles certainly have not lost their allure, as recent protests in Ukraine, triggered by President Viktor Yanukovych’s decision to shun closer ties with Europe, have shown."
"Nonetheless, the ESS’s soft-power vision should not be allowed to obscure the security challenges that Europe faces."
"With the rise of non-traditional threats, Europeans are increasingly overlooking classical security risks like inter-state warfare, believing that they are no longer relevant – a notion that is reflected in the ESS."
"But, as China’s increasingly assertive stance in the South and East China Seas starkly demonstrates, this idea is not only wrong; it can be very dangerous."
"This brings us to the ESS’s third tenet: advancing “the development of a stronger international society, well-functioning international institutions, and a rule-based international order.”"
"In this case, the problem comes down to a lack of commitment, with the EU choosing the convenience of informal and ad hoc groupings over the challenge of reforming key institutions like the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank, which are essential for effective multilateralism."
"Indeed, the EU is among the leading actors in the current “G” fad, which has culminated most recently in the G-20."
"And, despite being an embodiment of international law, the EU indulges in soft-law approaches, whether at the recent COP-19 climate-change meeting in Warsaw, or by supporting the “Geneva agreement” on Iran’s nuclear program, which, it is now clear, is nothing more than two aspirational declarations linked by a press release."
"In developing its new security strategy, Europe must consider America’s role as an essential component of the geopolitical environment, viewing the US not as a foil, but as a nuanced partner."
"Beyond NATO, which remains important even at a low ebb, the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership offers a potent opportunity to shape a rule-based international order."
"The shine may have come off the EU, but the gripping scenes from Kyiv’s Maidan Square are a powerful reminder of the enduring appeal of Europe’s core values."
"What the EU needs now is an updated external strategy that capitalizes on this allure to bolster its influence, security, and prosperity, thereby halting its slide toward irrelevance."
America’s Strategic Blindne
"MADRID – The recriminations over US spying activities, triggered by the revelations of the former American intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden, have now reached fever pitch."
"Questions abound – about what President Barack Obama knew and when, about the legitimacy of eavesdropping on friendly foreign leaders’ conversations, about the future of transatlantic relations, and even about the meaning of the term “ally.”"
"But the current firestorm, like other recent diplomatic crises for the United States, reflects a more fundamental problem: the lack of strategic vision in American foreign policy."
"Until the US is able to establish an overarching, purpose-oriented framework through which it relates to the world, a reactive approach is inevitable, with high-intensity incidents such as we have seen this month continuing to be the norm."
"For more than 40 years, the Cold War policy of containment of Soviet influence provided America its strategic framework."
"Though US tactics were debated and shifted from administration to administration, the overarching approach remained consistent, because it was broadly supported by Republicans and Democrats alike."
"Of course, an overarching national-security strategy provided no guarantee against problems or even major disasters in countries like Vietnam and Nicaragua. Nonetheless, in hindsight, containment infused an order and organization on US foreign policy that is absent today."
"After the fall of the Berlin Wall, the necessity that had been driving containment disappeared."
"The US, inebriated by victory, saw in the triumph over the Soviet bloc another sign of its exceptionalism, and found itself taken in by the mirage that its Cold War success was itself a strategy."
"What followed was a decade of scattershot foreign policy marked by notable cases of inaction, together with individual initiatives taken largely without reference to a broader doctrine."
"Unchallenged in the world’s unipolar moment, the US had the luxury of not knowing its strategic goals."
"Shocked by the attacks of September 11, the US forced a new framework onto its still-unquestioned belief in the inexorable movement of history toward freedom."
"Unfortunately, what emerged was a deeply flawed approach, not least because in declaring a “war on terror,” America positioned itself against a tactic, not an entity or an ideology."
"Under Obama, the US has begun to depart from this approach. The problem is that it remains a departure without any meaningful destination."
"As in the 1990’s, the US has no organizing imperative, and the result is the same: a combination of inactivity and incoherent initiatives."
"And, at a time of domestic political polarization, the lack of a global strategy denies a potential rallying point around which Democrats and Republicans can unite."
"Two decades ago, geopolitical conditions limited blowback from America’s foreign-policy vacuum. Today, the US remains the world’s essential power, but it is no longer the exclusive power."
"It cannot solve problems that directly affect it by acting on its own, though its leadership remains indispensable."
That is all the more true given that the nature of such problems has also changed.
"America, like the rest of us, is vulnerable to climate change, pandemics, and terrorism – challenges that require coordinated global solutions."
"For the US, however, the utility of multilateralism is purely situational."
"Above all, multilateralism is never preferable to a “good” bilateral solution – a view that has reinforced behavior that undermines, rather than strengthens, the capacity for effective international action."
"Indeed, always ready to negotiate treaties but rarely prepared to sign – and even less likely to ratify – them, the US remains absent from such key global agreements as the Kyoto Protocol, the Mine Ban Treaty, and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea."
"Its inspired creativity and support in building formal institutions like the United Nations and World Bank has given way to a predilection for weak, informal, and ad hoc groupings, such as the various G-somethings and “coalitions of the willing.”"
Establishing effective multilateralism requires an emphasis on rules and institutions that facilitate coordination.
The recent decision by the US to sign the Arms Trade Treaty could be a good start – if only Congress could marshal the bipartisan support needed to ratify it.
But scattered moves in the right direction will not suffice.
What is really needed is a change in vision and mentality – a shift from viewing multilateralism as a tactic to embracing it as a strategic imperative.
The current spying scandal is the product of a rudderless US foreign policy focused on narrowly drawn tactical objectives that exist outside the conceptual funnel of a comprehensive vision.
"The result in this case has been damage to the transatlantic relationship, with some in Europe even calling for a halt to the talks on the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP)."
"Suspending the trade talks would be folly, not just in terms of the regional impact, but also because the TTIP should be an exercise in rule-making that echoes globally."
"The current diplomatic crisis, too, is an opportunity to ensure that transatlantic discussions about privacy and surveillance reverberate in a multilateral setting; seizing it would represent a small but significant contribution to the strategic vision that has been sorely lacking for the last quarter-century."
Europe’s Juncker Revolution
"MADRID – Before his appointment as EU Commission President, Jean-Claude Juncker was pilloried as an old-school federalist who would do little to alter the status quo."
But the new structure that he has imposed on the Commission implies a radical overhaul of how things are done in Brussels.
"Up to now, a focus on who has been appointed to what post – in particular, the appointment of the relatively inexperienced Federica Mogherini as EU High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy – has overshadowed the Commission’s structural transformation."
But individual commissioners are far less important than the trends that have caused the Commission to shift its priorities from enlargement and the internal market toward energy and monetary union.
"One such trend is Europeans’ growing skepticism toward integration, exemplified in May’s European Parliament election."
"With newer European Union members backsliding – Romania on the rule of law, Bulgaria in corruption, and Hungary on democratic norms under Viktor Orbán’s government – now is the time, or so it seems, to focus on existing members."
"Reinforcing this shift is Turkey’s drift toward authoritarianism, which is undermining the viability of its candidacy for EU membership."
"As for Ukraine, recent gestures of solidarity, such as the signing of an association agreement, are unlikely to develop into anything substantial in the foreseeable future."
"In downgrading EU enlargement as a formal policy priority, the Commission is preparing itself to take other important steps."
The upheaval among Europe’s southern and eastern neighbors may well bring about a long-overdue revamping of the EU’s Neighborhood Policy.
"And, in pursuit of other avenues for expanding the EU’s reach, European leaders might reinvigorate the European Economic Area."
"Another policy area that has lost its centrality is the internal market – a notable decision, given that it has been the centerpiece of the European project since the Commission was created in 1958."
"The internal market’s four pillars – the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people – have underpinned broader EU measures, in areas like foreign policy and justice and home affairs, and will now be subsumed under new policy labels, from economy and financial affairs to the digital agenda."
This move away from the internal market can be explained partly by member governments’ aversion to more EU-level legislation.
"Though complaints about the “bloated” acquis communitaire (the body of EU law) are often unfounded, the EU legislative process is not without its shortcomings, as recent attempts at harmonization clearly demonstrate."
"For example, for the EU-wide statutory audit that was completed in April, the European Parliament agreed to a revised directive and new regulation that should have been directly applicable in all 28 member countries."
"But, in more than 20 cases, member states were given discretion over its implementation and interpretation."
"The new Commission will attempt to change this by focusing on rule implementation and oversight, rather than creation."
"This effort will be coordinated by representatives in seven newly established vice-presidential positions, and spearheaded by the first vice president to have a portfolio focused on “better regulation.”"
"To be sure, easing regulatory burdens is a longstanding leitmotif of the EU."
"Though the last two Commissions, led by José Manuel Barroso, espoused a commitment to rationalizing, clarifying, and compiling rules, little concrete action has been taken."
"Juncker’s changes, however, may portend genuine progress on this front, as well as toward monetary and energy union."
"Indeed, the new Commission’s structure suggests that Juncker hopes to enhance its role in guiding the European Monetary Union and related policies, control over which largely rested with the European Council and EU member governments (especially Germany) during the crisis."
"Similarly, a new vice president has been introduced for energy, which has been reframed as “energy union.”"
"The lack of progress on this front during the last two Commissions was rooted mainly in Germany’s Russian modernization project, which has shaped its approach to energy security."
"For its part, France has been reluctant to build an interconnected European grid, owing to its heavy reliance on nuclear energy."
"Given Russian behavior in Ukraine, however, EU leaders have been rethinking their approach."
"In this context, the Commission’s new structure – not to mention the fact that the new European Council president, former Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk, has long sought an energy union – may well push the policy forward."
"Though it is impossible to understand fully the implications of the Commission’s new structure at this early stage, some of its institutional ramifications are already emerging."
"Beyond inciting a kind of tug-of-war with the European Council, the Commission’s shift away from lawmaking will alter the European Parliament’s role, which it has forged over the last five years on the back of the Commission’s active legislative agenda."
"With little authority to initiate legislation, the Parliament, too, will have no choice but to pivot toward oversight."
Precisely how all of this all plays out in the coming months and years will determine whether the European project progresses or stagnates.
Perhaps observers should be paying a little less attention to the “who” and a bit more to the “what.”
Africa Beyond Ebola
"MADRID – Among this summer’s grave global worries, the spread of the Ebola virus has monopolized the discussion of Sub-Saharan Africa and reinvigorated hoary notions of disorder and despair – at a time when a new image of a dynamic Africa was emerging."
"In fact, there is still strong reason for optimism about the region’s prospects."
The Ebola outbreak overshadowed three key events affecting the region.
"On July 1, a major organizational restructuring at the World Bank Group was implemented."
"Two weeks later, the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) announced the establishment of the New Development Bank."
"And, in early August, African government and business leaders gathered in Washington, DC, for a summit that could portend transformative private investment in Africa."
Such investment is essential in a world in which net private capital flows to developing countries outstrip official development assistance by a margin of ten to one.
"If this is to be a turning point for Africa, rather than another false dawn, this summer must be the start of a prolonged effort to stimulate private-sector engagement."
"The reorganization of the World Bank is a central part of a larger effort under its president, Jim Yong Kim, to reposition the Bank as a facilitator vis-a-vis the private sector, rather than a primary provider."
"From 2009 to 2013, new investment commitments by the International Finance Corporation, the World Bank’s private-sector lending arm, have risen 73%."
"Meanwhile, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, the Bank’s provider of political risk insurance covering investments in developing countries, has moved to expand its activities, both by broadening the types of projects that it supports and widening existing definitions to allow greater coverage."
July’s restructuring occurs within the context of these broader moves.
"In reorganizing the World Bank Group’s central component, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Kim has adopted a management-consulting model that unites expertise with regional coverage."
"Seeking to eliminate the bureaucratic “silos” that have isolated regional experts from one another, 14 global practice groups in areas such as energy, water, and education have been established to bring to bear the full force of the World Bank’s considerable knowledge on projects and partnerships."
"Just as the World Bank was repositioning itself, the BRICS agreed to establish their own bank."
"There are significant outstanding issues about how the New Development Bank will operate, but early indications suggest that infrastructure will be central to its activities, with an emphasis on Africa."
The World Bank estimates that insufficient infrastructure reduces productivity in Africa by approximately 40%.
"The entrance of a new player with initial authorized capital of $100 billion – along with the United States’ Power Africa program, which has garnered $26 billion in commitments since its launch last year, and the World Bank’s new Global Infrastructure Facility – promises to help ease infrastructure financing significantly."
"But, as of now, the New Development Bank is little more than a statement of political solidarity, and whether it comes into existence remains to be seen."
"Even if it does begin to function, the BRICS lack what gives development banks, and the World Bank in particular, legitimacy and weight: a staff composed mostly of dedicated experts who are among the world’s best."
"Finally, the high profile of the US-Africa Leaders Summit, with more than 40 heads of state in attendance, as well as President Barack Obama’s direct involvement, generated buzz about Africa."
US businesses and investors certainly gained more awareness about Africa’s potential and a deeper understanding of the variety of investment climates throughout the continent.
"But, though the summit may be called a success, its long-term implications are unclear, particularly given the uncertainty about what will follow."
"At the moment, there does not seem to be a plan to institutionalize the summit."
"Moreover, the participation of so many heads of state overshadowed that of African business leaders."
"The practical connections that US companies will need when deciding whether to invest could have been cultivated on the summit’s margins, or in its aftermath, but were not."
Laying a foundation for future engagement requires ongoing commitment and effort that goes beyond mere publicity.
The same could be said about the World Bank.
There is much work to be done in integrating the new organizational model with existing Bank structures and practice areas.
"Even if this transition occurs seamlessly, the Bank faces a serious internal struggle against entrenched bureaucratic interests and a pervasive institutional mindset that is overly risk-averse and fixates on processes rather than outcomes."
"In recent years, Africa, once a land of pity, has emerged as a land of opportunity. If it is to become a land of performance, the goal must be to facilitate investment, both domestic and foreign."
"That will demand effort and commitment; given that a stable international order increasingly depends on a prosperous and growing Africa, it is a goal that the world cannot afford to miss."
Europe’s Iranian Imperative
"MADRID – Last month, with the world’s attention fixed on the crisis in Crimea and the search for Malaysian Airlines Flight 370, the latest round of negotiations between Iran and the P5+1 (the United States, China, France, Russia, and the United Kingdom, plus Germany) passed quietly in Vienna."
"Even with discussions set to continue next week, the talks’ outcome remains far from certain – and world leaders cannot afford to become distracted."
"This is especially true for Europe, whose unified approach to Iran has been invaluable up to this point."
"Indeed, it was the bite of European sanctions that ultimately brought Iran to the negotiating table, and the force of unified European diplomacy facilitated the “joint plan of action,” which set out the terms for reaching a comprehensive long-term agreement within six months."
"But now, at the plan’s halfway point, there has been little concrete progress, with last month’s negotiations producing no headway on two key issues being discussed: the acceptable level for uranium enrichment in Iran and the future of the heavy-water reactor at Arak."
The sharp contrast between this lack of achievement and Iran’s recent declarations about reaching a final deal by July raises important questions about Iran’s strategy and goals – questions that negotiators must consider carefully when determining the best approach.
The key to success is the background against which the process plays out.
Iran is a land of contrasts.
"On a recent visit organized by the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR), the coexistence of entrenched tradition and rapid transformation was starkly apparent."
Central Tehran – ebullient with young people and high-heeled women donning testimonial headscarves and mid-thigh jackets over pants – embodies a thirst for openness.
"More than 60% of Iranians were born after the 1979 Islamic Revolution, and more than 40% were born after the Iran-Iraq War of the 1980’s."
"For them, the revolution is a part of history, not the main source of their personal values."
The toll taken by years of tough economic sanctions is also apparent.
"Despite Iranian officials’ best efforts to downplay the sanctions’ impact, it is difficult to spin inflation in excess of 30% and projected GDP growth of just 1% this year."
"The combination of a young population and a crumbling economy is a combustible mix, one that amounts to an existential threat to the regime – and the regime knows it."
"In this sense, the imperative to reach a prosperity-enhancing agreement with the international community is greater than ever for Iran’s leadership."
"Furthermore, Iran’s negotiating style, like its capital city, can be both fatiguing and confusing."
"Just moments after elaborating at length on the Koran’s prohibition of nuclear weapons, an interlocutor would declare that the underground Fordow nuclear facility’s impregnability to airstrikes must be central to any deal."
The reality is that Iran does not envisage giving up its nuclear breakout capacity.
"The negotiations are aimed not at eradication, but at lengthening lead-time – specifically, limiting uranium-enrichment levels to 3.5%, establishing a strong inspections regime, and reaching an agreement on the Arak nuclear facility."
"But even this may not happen. After all, Iranian officials have thus far not demonstrated their commitment to accepting stringent and verifiable checks."
"Moreover, Iran has managed to separate the nuclear negotiations from broader, related issues like its ballistic-missile program, its support for groups like Hezbollah, and its domestic human-rights record."
"With the US loath to introduce potential spoilers into the mix, there is no chance that any of these issues will be up for discussion."
"In this context, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton’s meeting with dissidents during her most recent trip to Tehran was merely a symbolic gesture."
"This leaves Iran the opening it needs to place a strategic bet that the Syrian conflict will generate increasing friction between the West and Iran’s regional archrival, Saudi Arabia."
"For Iran, a staunch supporter of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, a weaker US-Saudi relationship is key to shifting the regional balance of power – especially if it is accompanied by the easing of Western economic sanctions."
"To some degree, this hope is reinforced by Iran’s perception of US President Barack Obama as a motivated partner in the nuclear talks."
"After all, a long-term agreement would be both a singular foreign-policy achievement for Obama and a boon to his efforts to disentangle the US from the Middle East."
But Iran also recognizes that the clock is ticking.
"Obama’s presidency is coming to an end, the Republicans are poised to regain control of the Senate in November’s mid-term election, and Democrats are increasingly reticent to be viewed as “soft on Iran.”"
"As a result, the US Congress appears to be growing more hostile toward a deal; indeed, the longer it takes to conclude a final agreement, the more likely Congress is to scupper it."
"In this context, Europe has a key role to play."
"While Europe’s reputation for foreign-policy “softness” continues to shape Iranian perceptions, the EU’s role in compelling Iran to negotiate underpins the current talks."
"Likewise, it was France’s insistence on more stringent controls that initially blocked the agreement in Geneva last November."
"A decade ago, Europe disappointed Iran by withdrawing from negotiations, under pressure from the US – a move that some have suggested aided former Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s rise to power."
"Today, Europe will be critical to driving progress, particularly in the event that the US Congress torpedoes a sensible agreement."
"Indeed, on Iran, Europe’s unified approach has enabled it to have a greater impact than on any other significant foreign-policy issue."
This should be regarded as a model for the future and a lesson for the present.
"By preserving its unity of purpose and maintaining the pressure and negotiating momentum that it has generated, Europe can demonstrate to Iran, the US, and itself that it has what it takes to be a major global actor."
Forsaken Syria
"MADRID – In this year of ubiquitous commemorations, the centennial of Jan Karski’s birth has been largely overlooked."
And yet Karski’s legacy is more important than ever – nowhere more so than in Syria.
"As the Geneva II peace process slogs along – leaving cadavers and atrocities to pile up – Karski’s dedication to bringing the plight of Poland’s Jews to the world’s attention during World War II, despite the inertia of governments and publics, embodies exactly what Syria desperately needs."
"In 1942, Karski, a Polish-born diplomat, traveled to the United Kingdom to report on what came to be called the Holocaust."
"The next year, he embarked on a mission to the United States to brief President Franklin D. Roosevelt and other dignitaries on the horrors that he had witnessed."
"In both cases, he was met with skepticism and apathy."
"Indeed, it was only toward the end of the war that action was taken to stop the slaughter."
"Although the Holocaust is a category of persecution sui generis, one cannot avoid thinking of Karski in light of the international community’s approach to Syria today."
Expectations for the Geneva talks are so low that trivial matters – such as the fact that President Bashar al-Assad’s negotiators and the opposition are sitting together in the same room (though not at the same table) – are being hailed as successes.
Even the agreement to allow women and children to leave blockaded areas of the city of Homs – an anti-Assad stronghold – fell far short of international mediators’ vision (and even this achievement seems to be in doubt).
"Instead of allowing a United Nations aid convoy to bring humanitarian aid to the area, the government agreed to release women and children on an as-yet-uncertain timeline, while men can leave only after their names had been cleared, raising fears of arrest."
"Meanwhile, amid plodding deliberations of incremental steps that are clearly inadequate, Syrians are being displaced, wounded, tortured, and killed in droves."
"By any measure, the level of suffering in Syria is shocking."
"Although figures do not convey the cruelty by all sides, it has become de rigueur to cite the numbers: more than 100,000 dead, 2.3 million refugees, and four million people internally displaced."
"But a year ago, the figures were already dire: 60,000 dead, 700,000 international refugees, and two million internally displaced."
"If there were a threshold of misery that would cause the world to say, “Enough is enough,” it surely would have been crossed by now."
"The ugly truth is that the world’s response to this crisis has been shaped by geopolitical interests, not the need to put an end to appalling human suffering."
"Indeed, it is no secret that the conflict serves as a proxy for larger struggles – between Saudi Arabia and Iran, Saudi Arabia and Qatar, the US and Iran, Russia and the US, Shia and Sunni Muslims, and moderates and extremists – and that resolving it will require significant effort on all of these fronts."
"From an American perspective, Syria is not strategically critical."
"President Barack Obama’s administration has maintained an intensely inward-looking focus, reinforced by a public wary of foreign engagements."
Nothing short of a drastic change in the conflict’s nature that threatened America’s core interests would lead to direct US involvement.
"Guilt, after all, is a poor motivator for international action."
Even the UK and France – the only two countries that were not shy about threatening military action against Assad’s regime – got cold feet when confronted with the possibility of going it alone.
"Instead, the world is responding to graphic images of unspeakable brutality – torture by the regime or executions carried out by the opposition – with sterile shows of outrage."
"The stream of statements, half-measures, and clumsy initiatives has done little to improve the situation – and, in some instances, has made things worse."
"Consider Obama’s call, backed by no action, for Assad to “step aside,” and his repeated promises, dating to early 2012, to provide non-lethal aid to the Syrian opposition – promises that were finally fulfilled late last year, and then only temporarily. This gap between rhetoric and action left a vacuum;"
"Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and private donors subsequently filled it by channeling support to extremist elements of the opposition, strengthening their hand at the expense of those being called moderates."
But the most infamous example of this policy paralysis was Obama’s 2012 declaration that the use of chemical weapons was the “red line” beyond which the US would be forced to intervene.
"His ultimate failure to follow through on his proclamation emboldened and, in a way, re-legitimized Assad."
It remains to be seen whether Geneva II will follow this pattern.
"The price of the talks has already been high, with all sides having ramped up violence to strengthen their respective positions ahead of the negotiations."
"This is to say nothing of the fiasco surrounding the withdrawn invitation to Iran, whose buy-in will be essential for any resolution."
"In any case, the incremental nature of the talks belies the situation’s urgency."
"Amid the current focus on regime change, a transitional government, and negotiating delegations, there is a real danger that the desperate humanitarian situation will be overlooked."
"Here, citizens have a critical role to play."
"But, like their leaders, publics everywhere have been reticent to act. Indeed, opinion polls show that, despite near-universal awareness of the situation in Syria, there is very little public support for intervention."
But handwringing will not help; we – individuals – must accept real responsibility for ending the tragedy and press our leaders to act.
It has been more than 70 years since Karski presented his report to the world.
"In that time, we have created the United Nations, adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and discussed endlessly governments’ “responsibility to protect” their citizens."
"Yet, watching the Syrian tragedy develop, one might conclude that nothing has changed."
"How many times must we say, “Never again”?"
An Arab Spring?
PARIS – Is Tunisia the first Arab authoritarian domino to fall?
Or is it a unique case that should not be viewed as a precedent for either the Arab world in general or the Maghreb in particular?
"The region’s dictators have sought to dismiss the “Jasmine Revolution,” but the spark that started in Tunisia could spread – perhaps in a matter of months or years – to the entire Arab world."
"Indeed, the wall of fear has crumbled, the people have spoken, and an “Arab spring” could be at hand."
"The message from Tunisia, at least so far, is clear: corrupt and authoritarian regimes, beware: unless you reform deeply and quickly, your days are numbered."
"The greatest danger is that the Jasmine Revolution could go the way of Romania’s anti-communist uprising of 20 years ago, with the old regime’s underlings expelling their bosses in order to stay in power."
But the best analogy for Tunisia today is Spain in the years preceding and following the death of Francisco Franco.
"By opening itself to the world through tourism, and with its emphasis on education and women’s rights, Ben Ali’s regime created something unique in the Middle East: a vibrant middle class. But the regime, like Franco’s dictatorship, did not treat the members of this new middle class like adults, thereby encouraging widespread frustration."
"Given this, it would seem wrong, if not dangerous, to compare Tunisia and its Jasmine Revolution to other national contexts in the region."
"Nevertheless, if Morocco looks stable today, this largely reflects two factors: monarchy and reform."
"Led by a group of technocrats surrounding the young King Mohammed VI, a reform process – including political liberalization – has begun in earnest, even if the results still seem modest."
"Moreover, Mohammed VI, as “Commander of the Believers,” benefits from a “Muslim” legitimacy that the leaders of Algeria and Egypt, two of the region’s most vulnerable regimes, do not possess."
"And Morocco, contrary to Algeria, does not suffer from the curse of oil."
"Even if the case of Tunisia is largely unique, it would be shortsighted to dismiss its potential influence elsewhere in the region, where many young Arabs in this age of Facebook and Twitter now “feel Tunisian.”"
"They, too, are humiliated by their leaders’ performance and, more deeply, their vulgar despotic essence."
"They, too, thirst for freedom."
"Whatever the Jasmine Revolution’s outcome, and even if it cannot become for the Arab world what the fall of the Berlin Wall was for Europe, it will establish a “before” and an “after.”"
The “after” is likely to highlight two potential models of political development for the Arab world: Turkey and Iran.
"If the revolutionary wave that began in Tunisia spreads to the rest of the Arab world, how many countries will be tempted by Turkish openness, and how many by Iranian fundamentalism?"
"Of course, that is a somewhat simplistic dichotomy."
"There are grey areas in the Turkish experiment with “moderate Islam,” and, beyond Iran’s Mullahs, there are reasons for hope in the vibrant and resilient character of that country’s civil society."
What is clear is the West’s preference for the Turkish model.
"Most Europeans may want to keep Turkey at a reasonable distance, but, confronted with changes and possible disorder, if not chaos, in the Arab world, they look favorably on Turkey’s potential to play a stabilizing role."
"To be sure, history never repeats itself, but could some kind of neo-Ottoman order be the best answer to the risk of “Arab chaos”?"
"Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s Turkey already plays a growing role in the region, and has strengthened its image with ordinary Arabs by taking a muscular diplomatic position against Israel’s deadly military assault in June 2010 on a Gaza-bound aid flotilla that had been organized by a Turkish charity."
But it is one thing to be popular and another to serve as a model.
"Turkey is demonstrating that Islam and modernity are compatible. But the Turks are the Ottoman Empire’s heirs, and the Arab world, contrary to Western hopes, may not be ready to exchange its current frustration for the humiliating admission that it requires its former rulers’ model to progress toward modernity."
"It would be dangerous to assume that after Tunisia, democracy in the Arab world is just around the corner. But the belief that nothing will change is equally illusory."
"For better or worse, history is on the move in the Arab world – and there is very little the West can do about it."
An Argentine Guide to the Greek Crisi
SANTIAGO – Policymakers in Europe seem to be surprised at the ongoing bank run in Greece (and the nascent run in Spain).
They should not be.
Anyone familiar with emerging-market meltdowns knows that a financial crisis nearly always follows a fiscal crisis.
Argentina’s default in 2001 is but one useful example.
"In the Argentine crisis, the economy contracted by 18% and unemployment soared to 22% of the labor force."
Greece is already close to these levels.
Argentina went through a complete and chaotic default on its public debt.
"In Greece, the “haircut” imposed on creditors so far has been managed by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund."
"But, with debt still unsustainable, the next round of Greek default could well make Argentina’s look positively Teutonic in its orderliness."
"In Argentina, the banking system came close to collapse, causing the government to ban bank withdrawals – introducing the so-called corralito, or bullpen, for deposits – and establishing capital controls."
That could be the stage that Greece is entering now.
"So, if the precedent of the Argentine and other emerging-market crises is a useful guide, what could be in store for Greece next?"
"To answer that question, it helps to recall the feedback loops that link fiscal and financial crises."
Banks hold government and corporate loans as assets.
"Fiscal crisis and default reduce the value of the former, while the ensuing recession undermines the value of the latter."
"That is the link running from budget to bank problems. But there is a link going in the opposite direction as well: as banks deleverage to offset losses, they cut credit and the economy slows, causing government revenue to fall."
"If and when banks require a capital injection from public sources, the additional expenditure – which can be large – weakens public finances still further."
These mutually reinforcing forces can work themselves out in a lengthy process of recession and deleveraging.
"Or they can prompt a sudden run on the banks, causing the financial system to implode."
The outcome depends on confidence.
"Economists have long understood that, in the absence of a credible lender of last resort, banks are vulnerable to self-fulfilling confidence crises."
"That lender can be monetary or fiscal, and in Greece both types are in doubt."
"If Greece’s agreement with the EU and the IMF unravels, the European Central Bank will no longer accept Greek bonds as collateral."
And the Greek state does not have the wherewithal to stand behind its banks.
"In these circumstances, it would be more surprising if depositors were not rushing to pull their funds out of Greek banks."
"The Argentine experience suggests that, after the run on bank deposits, the saga’s next installment is monetary collapse."
"With revenues plummeting and credit cut off, the Argentine provinces had to resort to printing scrip to pay salaries and pensions."
"At one point, more than a dozen quasi-currencies were in circulation."
What happens if Greece is cut off from EU and IMF credit?
"Optimists point out that the country is supposed to eliminate its primary deficit (the budget balance minus interest payments) by 2013, which implies that it could pay its non debt-related bills with its own resources after a default."
But that view overestimates the state’s capacity to collect revenues in the midst of a panic.
"With the economy in free fall and uncertainty pervasive, many households and firms simply stop paying taxes."
"So, even if the Greek government defaults on all of its debt, it might have no option but to print pieces of paper in order to meet its obligations."
"That would not constitute official abandonment of the euro, but, over time, the difference could become more formal than real."
The newly issued scrip – call it the neo-drachma – would be tradable and highly liquid.
"Even if it traded at a deep discount, as it surely would, sooner rather than later it would likely be used for settling all kinds of transactions."
"Here, the Argentine story suggests, the mechanism loops back to the banks: firms soon start complaining that their income is now denominated in neo-drachmas while their loans remain in euros. They begin to demand loudly that the loans be neo-drachmatized (“pesified” in Argentine parlance)."
A parliament anxious for public approval is eager to meet these demands.
"But this only accelerates the run on the banks, as households and firms realize that no solid assets are backing their deposits."
Paying public sector workers with depreciated neo-drachmas implies a cut in the real wages that they receive.
The final step in the process comes with the neo-drachmatization of private-sector wages.
"Firms again demand it, claiming that otherwise they cannot export."
"Unions initially oppose it, but eventually give in, spooked by the specter of even greater unemployment."
The promise of selective price controls sweetens the deal.
How large will the devaluation of the neo-drachma be?
"In Argentina, the number of pesos needed to buy one dollar rose by more than 300%."
"Greece posted a current-account deficit of nearly 10% of GDP in 2011, despite the domestic depression."
"The real devaluation necessary to restore external balance will be enormous, perhaps larger than that in Argentina."
"Greece now has its third government in less than a year, and a fourth is not far off."
"Argentina ran through four presidents in less than two years, before the political and economic situation stabilized."
"Greece, too, will eventually stabilize."
"At this point, that is just about the only hopeful precedent that the Argentine story holds."
An Asia Strategy for Iran
"SINGAPORE − When the ongoing turmoil surrounding the Iranian elections finally ends, the West is likely to walk away with a simple black and white judgment: the bad guys won."
"Of course, the West did the right thing by supporting the good guys, the street demonstrators."
"Hence, the West need not bear any responsibility for the outcome."
"The tragedy of such thinking is that it does not allow for any moral and political complexity or nuance, yet that is exactly what will be needed if the many problems surrounding Iran are to be resolved."
"Moreover, with Mahmoud Ahmadinejad remaining as Iran’s president, the West will once again resort to its usual method of dealing with unfriendly regimes: impose more sanctions."
But this would lead to an even greater tragedy.
The only clear lesson to emerge from Iran’s disputed presidential election is that the country has a vibrant and indeed dynamic civil society.
Many brave Iranians were prepared to risk their lives to defend their beliefs.
Their ability to do so confirms that Iran is not a closed totalitarian state like North Korea.
"Despite many years of rule by a theocratic establishment (or perhaps because of it), Iranian minds remain open and engaged."
"So there is real hope that Iran can change, modernize, and open up as the rest of Asia has."
"Indeed, the only viable long-term strategy to adopt, therefore, is to stop trying to isolate Iran and instead nudge Iranians into engaging more with modern Asia."
"In the Iranian worldview, there are three great ancient Asian civilizations: Chinese, Indian, and Persian (with Persia being the greatest)."
Iranians expect to perform on par with China and India.
"So, while Western hectoring of Iran will not work, when Iranians see their society falling far behind China and India as those countries open up to the world, they may become motivated to reconsider their path."
"The more Iranians visit China and India, the more likely that Iran will change."
"Similarly, the West should find ways to re-engage with Iranian society, a major obstacle to which is the absence of diplomatic relations between the United States and Iran."
American foreign policy assumes that diplomatic relations with Iran are somehow an act of approval.
"In fact, the exact opposite is true."
"Diplomacy was invented precisely in order to enable relations between adversaries, not friends."
No one needs diplomatic immunity to talk to their friends.
They need it to talk to their adversaries.
"Unfortunately, no US politician appears willing to explain this bit of common sense to the American public."
The US might also learn from other examples.
Many Americans applauded Egyptian President Anwar el - Sadat for his political courage in visiting Jerusalem three decades ago – a decision for which he ultimately paid with his life − even though the vast majority of Egyptians strongly disapproved.
"It is useful to recall President Richard Nixon’s words when, prior to restoring diplomatic relations China, he visited Beijing: “We have at times in the past been enemies."
We have great differences today.
What brings us together is that we have common interests which transcend those differences.
"As we discuss our differences, neither of us will compromise our principles."
"But while we cannot close the gulf between us, we can try to bridge it so that we may be able to talk across it.”"
"In engaging Iran, the West should ignore the nature of its regime."
It is almost impossible for any outsider to understand Iran’s real internal political dynamics.
"Just when the world reached a consensus that Ahmadinejad was merely an instrument of the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, Ahmadinejad appointed a Vice-President against Khamenei’s wishes (though he later retracted the appointment)."
What we do know with certainty is that the regime is divided.
These divisions will allow new forces to emerge in Iranian society.
So all means should be found to reach out to Iranian society at all levels.
"Iranian students should be encouraged to visit and study in Asian universities, where they would discover how confident young Chinese and Indian students are about the future − which might well cause them to reflect on why young Iranians do not share that optimism."
A final reason for the West to change course is that Western sanctions are proving increasingly useless.
"Only 12% of the world’s population lives in the West, and power is slipping steadily away from it."
The July 2009 decision by the Non-Aligned Movement (comprising 118 member states) to hold its next meeting in Tehran provides a powerful demonstration of non-Western perceptions about Iran.
"If the West persists with its sanctions, it will not do any good."
It will only make Western leaders feel good.
But what is ultimately more important: doing good or feeling good?
An Assassination in Belgrade
Not since Archduke Franz Ferdinand's assassination has a murder shaken Belgrade as much as the killing of Serbian Premier Zoran Djindjic.
The bullets that killed Djindjic may also have slain Serbian hopes for normalcy at the very moment that we were emerging from the nightmare of Slobodan Milosevic's long misrule.
"With the bloody wars of the Yugoslav succession still etched deeply in everyone's minds, does Djindjic's assassination herald the end of an era of political violence or the dawn of a new one?"
"Milosevic's ouster two years ago was turbulent, but no one was killed."
"Serbs were justly proud: a dictatorship was ended in a democratic, peaceful way."
Milosevic's extradition to face charges of war crimes before the Hague Tribunal--a trial that has proceeded without incident in Serbia--was also peaceful.
"With relations in the region and with the West approaching something like normalcy, Serbs were beginning to feel, at long last, that they were finding peace with themselves and the world."
"Of course, assassinations are nothing new in Serbia."
"""Arkan,"" the leader of the most murderous paramilitary group in the wars in Bosnia and Kosovo, and a political power even after Milosevic's fall, was murdered in Belgrade last year."
Djindjic himself narrowly escaped a highway assassination attempt only last month.
But most Serbs were beginning to believe that the ballot and not the gun was becoming the dominant tool of politics.
Djindjic's effective leadership brought about this change.
"Although the most popular politician of the uprising against Milosevic was Vojislav Kostunica, who replaced him as president, it was Djindjic who skillfully coordinated the volatile coalition that opposed the regime."
His boundless energy and quick thinking delivered success from behind the scenes.
"As Serbia's prime minister after Milosevic, he resembled a corporate CEO more than the Heidelberg-educated philosophy professor that he was."
"Djindjic remained pragmatic, never doctrinaire."
"As a result of Serbia's predicament, he accumulated more power than prime ministers typically wield."
"Milosevic's regime left behind crippled institutions, with large sections of the police and judiciary and many state-owned companies remaining under the control of Milosevic's clique."
"With little trust in existing institutions to implement reforms, Djindjic often took shortcuts, using extra-legal means and improvised parliamentary majorities to push through legislation."
"Only prosperity and a ""European Serbia"" mattered."
Did these short cuts help incite his death?
Who can say?
They certainly did little to build respect for the rule of law.
Yet the immediate consequences of Djindjic's death will be tragic.
"He was seen in the West as a reformer, and reform may not proceed without him."
"If it does not, urgently needed Western investment won't materialize."
Serbia will again seem a benighted and lawless land.
"Although Djindjic was not popular, only extreme nationalists and die-hard Milosevic supporters are cheering."
"They regard his murder as just punishment for the ""traitor"" Djindjic's decision to extradite Milosevic--and other Serbian ""heroes""--to The Hague."
The more dangerous outcome is that the assassination may reinforce the belief in Serbia that only authoritarian rule is possible.
"Given the prevalence of this belief, Djindjic's death creates a serious power vacuum precisely because his vast personal power was moving Serbia in some of the right directions."
"Now, it is feared, organized crime will intimidate his less talented successors."
"For now, Serbia's government has imposed a state of emergency."
But effective or quick suppression of the organized criminals who were almost certainly behind Djindjic's murder is unlikely.
The reason for this also explains why Djindjic could not rely on the Serb state to carry out his policies.
Many policemen and intelligence officers are on the crime bosses' payrolls.
"The fact that a former president of Serbia, Ivan Stambolic, could disappear without a trace in 1999 is grim testimony to the power of Serbia's criminal underworld."
"Indeed, Djindjic may well be a victim of his recent moves to root out organized crime."
"He was initially slow in fighting organized crime, because he did not want to alienate the bulk of Milosevic's mafia-infested establishment at once."
He preferred to confront corrupt institutions one at a time as he consolidated his rule.
"Sadly, he may also have needed the support of some crime bosses at the outset."
Djindjic's murder will make the fight against crime the country's main political goal.
"In this, politicians will at last have something like united public support."
"But crime would not be as powerful as it is, and the police and judiciary would not be as corrupt, if Serbia's economy were in better shape."
Serbia is poor and Western aid is desperately needed.
Djindjic's murder shows that the situation is so dire that aid should no longer be strictly conditional on harsh reforms.
"For the moment, extreme nationalists and Milosevic supporters may feel triumphant."
But the one certain success of Djindjic's era is that they will never return to power.
"Their vision of a chauvinistic, inward-looking Serbia has been discredited, while Djindjic's stance may become more popular due to his martyrdom."
Moments of defeat have always been history's turning points in Serbia.
"Once again, Serbs face such a moment."
"This time, however, we must resolve to remember Zoran Djindjic's cause--political and economic liberty--more than his blood sacrifice."
A Nation Kidnapped
"The editorial published in the Colombian newspaper Diario del Sur on July 6 (“A Slap in the Face of Violence”) was ecstatic: “Never before, in spite of the violence that has oppressed us during so many years, has Colombia lived a day like yesterday: historic and unforgettable in every aspect.”"
"At noon on July 5, Colombians throughout the country poured into the streets to show their outrage at the news that 11 provincial politicians had been killed while being held by leftist rebels."
"A human chain was formed, with participants wearing white tops."
"My colleagues in the capital, Bogotá, and in the south of the country, where we have humanitarian projects, say that everyone was waving white scarves."
White balloons were launched everywhere.
"Press agencies estimate that, with more than one million participants, this was the largest public protest since October 1999, which was also – sadly – a demonstration against violence and kidnappings."
"But, while the killing of the 11 congressmen from Cali region – attributed to “crossfire’” during an attack by an “unidentified military group”the leftist rebels – provoked shock and anger, there was no agreement on how to solve the chronic problem of “El Secuestro” (The Kidnapping)."
Some Colombians demand a “humanitarian accord” – an exchange of prisoners for hostages – and reject “blood and fire” rescue attempts.
"Others oppose “ceding the territory” (setting up a demilitarized zone, where any such exchange could take place) and demand of the government “firmeza, siempre firmeza!” (to be “firm” and go after the rebels)."
"As is often the case in armed conflicts, civilians suffer the most."
"The July 5 protest reminded us of the 3,000 kidnappings since the start of this four-decade conflict, but Colombians could form human chains and release white balloons for many other reasons."
"Consider, for example, Colombia’s grim ranking as global leader in the number of victims injured by landmines."
"According to “Landmine Monitor 2006,” Colombia had 1,110 victims last year, followed by Cambodia with 875 and Afghanistan with 848."
This unnoticed drama is emblematic of the under-reported Colombian conflict.
"Indeed, if there were such a thing as a combined index of despair, Colombia would be an undisputed leader."
"Hostage-taking, and killing and maiming by landmines, are but the side effects of the oldest and longest-running civil war in Latin America, which has resulted in three million internally displaced persons – one of the world’s highest levels, close to that of Sudan, Congo, and Iraq."
"Even if there were, by some miracle, a negotiated end to the fighting, the scars left by this conflict will remain."
"So, besides helping the country find a political solution, there is also a need to focus on long-term reconstruction and reconciliation, so that young lives distorted by the civil war can be righted and children can be rescued from the harmful influence of so much violence and bloodshed."
"In Colombia’s south – where the heavy presence of illegal armed groups makes social peace a distant dream – I went to visit a secondary school, as part of a needs assessment."
"After four hours on a dirt road, I reached a highlands hamlet."
"The smart and friendly teenagers were eager to learn how to surf the Internet, just installed in their school."
"But when I asked five of them what they would like to become, I understood that this conflict has marked them forever."
"Their dream careers were: lawyer, criminal investigator, forensic physician, and soldier."
"The fifth one wanted to become a chemist, so that he could set up a cocaine laboratory."
The teenagers’ plans simply reflect a sad reality: these pupils are the second generation that has not known anything but war.
"On the day of the march against violence, next to the editorial in"
It is perhaps a beginning.
A Nation of Vidiot
NEW YORK – The past half-century has been the age of electronic mass media.
Television has reshaped society in every corner of the world.
"Now an explosion of new media devices is joining the TV set: DVDs, computers, game boxes, smart phones, and more."
A growing body of evidence suggests that this media proliferation has countless ill effects.
"The United States led the world into the television age, and the implications can be seen most directly in America’s long love affair with what Harlan Ellison memorably called “the glass teat.”"
"In 1950, fewer than 8% of American households owned a TV; by 1960, 90% had one."
"That level of penetration took decades longer to achieve elsewhere, and the poorest countries are still not there."
"True to form, Americans became the greatest TV watchers, which is probably still true today, even though the data are somewhat sketchy and incomplete."
"The best evidence suggests that Americans watch more than five hours per day of television on average – a staggering amount, given that several hours more are spent in front of other video-streaming devices."
Other countries log far fewer viewing hours.
"In Scandinavia, for example, time spent watching TV is roughly half the US average."
"The consequences for American society are profound, troubling, and a warning to the world – though it probably comes far too late to be heeded."
"First, heavy TV viewing brings little pleasure."
"Many surveys show that it is almost like an addiction, with a short-term benefit leading to long-term unhappiness and remorse."
Such viewers say that they would prefer to watch less than they do.
"Moreover, heavy TV viewing has contributed to social fragmentation."
Time that used to be spent together in the community is now spent alone in front of the screen.
"Robert Putnam, the leading scholar of America’s declining sense of community, has found that TV viewing is the central explanation of the decline of “social capital,” the trust that binds communities together. Americans simply trust each other less than they did a generation ago."
"Of course, many other factors are at work, but television-driven social atomization should not be understated."
"Certainly, heavy TV viewing is bad for one’s physical and mental health."
"Americans lead the world in obesity, with roughly two-thirds of the US population now overweight."
"Again, many factors underlie this, including a diet of cheap, unhealthy fried foods, but the sedentary time spent in front of the TV is an important influence as well."
"At the same time, what happens mentally is as important as what happens physically."
Television and related media have been the greatest purveyors and conveyors of corporate and political propaganda in society.
"America’s TV ownership is almost entirely in private hands, and owners make much of their money through relentless advertising."
"Effective advertising campaigns, appealing to unconscious urges – typically related to food, sex, and status – create cravings for products and purchases that have little real value for consumers or society."
"The same, of course, has happened to politics."
"American politicians are now brand names, packaged like breakfast cereal."
Anybody – and any idea – can be sold with a bright ribbon and a catchy jingle.
"All roads to power in America lead through TV, and all access to TV depends on big money."
This simple logic has put American politics in the hands of the rich as never before.
Even war can be rolled out as a new product.
"The Bush administration promoted the premises of the Iraq war – Saddam Hussein’s non-existent weapons of mass destruction –in the familiar colorful, fast-paced, and graphics-heavy style of television advertising."
Then the war itself began with the so-called “shock and awe” bombing of Baghdad – a made-for-TV live spectacle aimed at ensuring high ratings for the US-led invasion.
"Many neuroscientists believe that the mental-health effects of TV viewing might run even deeper than addiction, consumerism, loss of social trust, and political propaganda."
Perhaps TV is rewiring heavy viewers’ brains and impairing their cognitive capacities.
"The American Academy of Pediatrics recently warned that TV viewing by young children is dangerous for their brain development, and called on parents to keep children under two away from the TV and similar media."
"A recent survey in the US by the organization Common Sense Media reveals a paradox, but one that is perfectly understandable."
"Children in poor American households today not only watch more TV than children in wealthy households, but are also more likely to have a television in their room."
"When a commodity’s consumption falls as income rises, economists call it an “inferior” good."
"To be sure, the mass media can be useful as a provider of information, education, entertainment, and even political awareness."
But too much of it is confronting us with dangers that we need to avoid.
"At the very least, we can minimize those dangers."
"Successful approaches around the world include limits on TV advertising, especially to young children; non-commercial, publicly-owned TV networks like the BBC; and free (but limited) TV time for political campaigns."
"Of course, the best defense is our own self-control."
"We can all leave the TV off more hours per day and spend that time reading, talking with each other, and rebuilding the bases of personal health and social trust."
Anatomy of a Crisi
BERKELEY – Getting out of our current financial mess requires understanding how we got into it in the first place.
"The fundamental cause, according to the likes of John McCain, was greed and corruption on Wall Street."
"Though not one to deny the existence of such base motives, I would insist that the crisis has its roots in key policy decisions stretching back over decades."
"In the United States, there were two key decisions."
"The first, in the 1970’s, deregulated commissions paid to stockbrokers."
"The second, in the 1990’s, removed the Glass-Steagall Act’s restrictions on mixing commercial and investment banking."
"In the days of fixed commissions, investment banks could make a comfortable living booking stock trades."
Deregulation meant competition and thinner margins.
Elimination of Glass-Steagall then allowed commercial banks to encroach on the investment banks’ other traditional preserves.
"In response, investment banks branched into new businesses like originating and distributing complex derivative securities."
They borrowed money and put it to work to sustain their profitability.
This gave rise to the first causes of the crisis: the originate-and-distribute model of securitization and the extensive use of leverage.
It is important to note that these were unintended consequences of basically sensible policy decisions.
"Other things being equal, deregulation allowed small investors to trade stocks more cheaply, which made them better off."
But other things were not equal.
"In particular, the fact that investment banks, which were propelled into riskier activities by these policy changes, were entirely outside the regulatory net was a recipe for disaster."
"Similarly, eliminating Glass-Steagall was fundamentally sensible."
"Conglomerates allow financial institutions to diversify their business, and combining with commercial banks allows investment banks to fund their operations using relatively stable deposits instead of fickle money markets."
"This model has proven its viability in Europe over a period of centuries, and its advantages are evident in the US even now with Bank of America’s purchase of Merrill Lynch."
But conglomeratization takes time.
"In the short run, Merrill, like the other investment banks, was allowed to double up its bets."
It remained entirely outside the purview of the regulators.
"As a stand-alone entity, it was then vulnerable to market swings."
A crisis sufficient to threaten the entire financial system was required to precipitate the inevitable conglomeratization.
The other element in the crisis was the set of policies that gave rise to global imbalances.
The Bush administration cut taxes.
The Fed cut interest rates in response to the 2001 recession.
"Financial innovation, meanwhile, worked to make credit even cheaper and more widely available."
"This, of course, is just the story of subprime mortgages in another guise."
The result was increased US spending and the descent of measured household savings into negative territory.
Of equal importance were the rise of China and the decline of investment in Asia following the 1997-1998 financial crisis.
"With China saving nearly 50% of its GNP, all that money had to go somewhere."
Much of it went into US treasuries and the obligations of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
"This propped up the dollar and reduced the cost of borrowing for US households, encouraging them to live beyond their means."
"It also created a more buoyant market for the securities of Freddie and Fannie, feeding the originate-and-distribute machine."
"Again, these were not outright policy mistakes."
Lifting a billion Chinese out of poverty is arguably the single most important event in our lifetimes.
The fact that the Fed responded quickly prevented the 2001 recession from worsening.
But there were unintended consequences. The failure of US regulators to tighten capital and lending standards when abundant capital inflows combined with loose Fed policies ignited a furious credit boom.
The failure of China to move more quickly to encourage higher domestic spending commensurate with its higher incomes added fuel to the fire.
"Now, a bloated financial sector is being forced to retrench."
"Some outcomes, like the marriage of Bank of America and Merrill Lynch, are happier than others, like the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers."
"But, either way, there will be downsizing."
Foreign central banks are suffering capital losses on their unthinking investments.
"As they absorb their losses on US treasury and agency securities, capital flows toward the US will diminish."
The US current-account deficit and the Asian surplus will shrink.
US households will have to start saving again.
The one anomaly is that the dollar has strengthened in recent weeks.
"With the US no longer viewed as a supplier of high-quality financial assets, one would expect the dollar to have weakened."
The dollar’s strength reflects the knee-jerk reaction of investors rushing into US treasuries as a safe haven.
"It is worth remembering that the same thing happened in August 2007, when the sub-prime crisis erupted."
"But once investors realized the extent of US financial problems, the rush into treasuries subsided, and the dollar resumed its decline."
"Now, as investors recall the extent of US financial problems, we will again see the dollar resume its decline."
Emphasizing greed and corruption as causes of the crisis leads to a bleak prognosis.
We are not going to change human nature.
We cannot make investors less greedy.
But an emphasis on policy decisions suggests a more optimistic outlook.
Unintended consequences cannot always be prevented.
Policy mistakes may not always be avoidable.
"But they at least can be corrected. That, however, requires first looking more deeply into the root causes of the problem."
Anatomy of a Financial Meltdown
"NEW YORK – A vicious circle is currently underway in the United States, and its reach could broaden to the global economy."
"America’s financial crisis has triggered a severe credit crunch that is making the US recession worse, while the deepening recession is leading to larger losses in financial markets – thus undermining the wider economy."
There is now a serious risk of a systemic meltdown in US financial markets as huge credit and asset bubbles collapse.
"The problem is no longer merely sub-prime mortgages, but rather a “sub-prime” financial system."
"The housing recession – the worst in US history and worsening every day – will eventually see house prices fall by more than 20%, with millions of Americans losing their homes."
"Delinquencies, defaults, and foreclosures are now spreading from sub-prime to near-prime and prime mortgages."
"Thus, total losses on mortgage-related instruments – include exotic credit derivatives such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) – will add up to more than $400 billion."
"Moreover, commercial real estate is beginning to follow the downward trend in residential real estate."
"After all, who wants to build offices, stores, and shopping centers in the empty ghost towns that litter the American West?"
"In addition to the downturn in real estate, a broader bubble in consumer credit is now collapsing: as the US economy slips into recession, defaults on credit cards, auto loans, and student loans will increase sharply."
"US consumers are shopped-out, savings-less, and debt-burdened."
"With private consumption representing more than 70% of aggregate US demand, cutbacks in household spending will deepen the recession."
We can also add to these financial risks the massive problems of bond insurers that guaranteed many of the risky securitization products such as CDOs.
"A very likely downgrade of these insurers’ credit ratings will force banks and financial institutions that hold these risky assets to write them down, adding another $150 billion to the financial system’s mounting losses."
Then there is the exposure of banks and other financial institutions to rising losses on loans that financed reckless leveraged buy-outs (LBOs).
"With a worsening recession, many LBOs that were loaded with too much debt and not enough equity will fail as firms with lower profits or higher losses become unable to service their loans."
"Given all this, the recession will lead to a sharp increase in corporate defaults, which had been very low over the last two years, averaging 0.6% per year, compared to an historic average of 3.8%."
"During a typical recession, the default rate among corporations may rise to 10-15%, threatening massive losses for those holding risky corporate bonds."
"As a result, the market for credit default swaps (CDS) ­– where protection against corporate defaults is bought and sold – may also experience massive losses."
"In that case, there will also be a serious risk that some firms that sold protection will go bankrupt, triggering further losses for buyers of protection when their counterparties cannot pay."
"On top of all this, there is a shadow financial system of non-bank financial institutions that, like banks, borrow short and liquid and lend to or invest in longer-term and illiquid assets."
"This shadow system includes structured investment vehicles (SIVs), conduits, money market funds, hedge funds, and investment banks."
"Like banks, all these financial institutions are subject to liquidity or rollover risk – the risk of going belly up if their creditors do not rollover their short-term credit lines."
"But, unlike banks, they do not have the safety net implied by central banks’ role as lender of last resort."
"Now that a recession is underway, US and global stock markets are beginning to fall: in a typical US recession, the S&amp;P 500 index falls by an average of 28% as corporate revenues and profits sink."
"Losses in stock markets have a double effect: they reduce households’ wealth and lead them to spend less; and they cause massive losses to investors who borrowed to invest in stock, thus triggering margin calls and asset fire sales."
"There is thus a broader risk that many leveraged investors in both equity and credit markets will be forced to sell illiquid assets in illiquid markets, leading to a cascading fall in asset prices to below their fundamental values."
The ensuing losses will aggravate the financial turmoil and economic contraction.
"Indeed, adding up all these losses in financial markets, the sum will hit a staggering $1 trillion."
"Tighter credit rationing will then further hamper the ability of households and firms to borrow, spend, invest, and sustain economic growth."
The risk that a systemic financial crisis will drive a more pronounced US and global recession has quickly gone from being a theoretical possibility to becoming an increasingly plausible scenario.
Anatomy of a Revolution Delayed
The ongoing conflict between Iran’s rulers and the Iranian public is the result of a head-on collision between two contradictory forces.
"In recent years, public attitudes in Iran have become more liberal."
"At the same time, power has shifted from conservative pragmatism toward a much more militant fundamentalism. The call by the most important group of Iran’s clerics for the election results to be thrown out is but the latest sign of the fight back of both the reformist and pragmatic conservative factions."
"Thirty years after the Islamic revolution, Iranians are growing demonstrably less religious and more liberal."
"Two face-to-face surveys of more than 2,500 Iranian adults, conducted in 2000 and 2005, clearly show the trend."
The percentage of those who “strongly agree” that democracy is the best form of government increased from 20% to 31%.
"Similarly, on a number of questions concerning gender equality – including political leadership, equal access to higher education, and wifely obedience – the numbers continued a downward trend."
"Those who considered love as the basis for marriage increased from 49% to 69%, while those who depended on parental approval fell from 41% to 24%."
"In 2005, a much higher percentage than in 2000 defined themselves as “Iranian, above all” rather than “Muslim, above all.”"
This trend is not hard to understand.
The imposition of a monolithic religious discourse on society has made liberal values attractive to Iranians.
"But, while this was reflected in reformist trends in the country’s wider political life, a movement toward militant fundamentalism took shape within the regime’s power structure."
Reform-minded politicians were partly to blame for this change.
"Far from opposing absolutist power as an impediment to religious democracy, they tried to persuade the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, of the value of reform."
"But Khamenei had no interest in reform, as he made plain in dismantling the reform movement."
"The presidency of Mohammad Khatami, an avowed reformer, who served eight years, beginning in 1997, convinced the Supreme Leader that his authority would be assured only if the presidency was held by a subservient fundamentalist such as the current president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad."
"In this, Khamenei was following the lead of the late Shah, who kept Amir Abbas Hoveyda, a loyal retainer, as prime minister from 1965 until the Shah was overthrown in 1979."
"The problem with the Supreme Leader’s calculation, however, is that Ahmadinejad is a loose cannon."
His populist rhetoric and religious fundamentalism have alienated a large section of conservative-pragmatist clerics and their supporters.
"Many members of this group honor the institution of private property, and Ahmadinejad’s talk of redistributing wealth is not to their liking."
"More disturbing to them is his apocalyptic conviction regarding the imminent advent of the Hidden Imam, the Mahdi, whose appearance is believed to lead to the destruction of the world and the end of time."
"Generally, Ahmadinejad begins his public speeches with prayers for the Mahdi’s immediate return."
"For the Shia religious hierarchy, long accustomed to relegating the advent of the Mahdi to a distant future, Ahmadinejad’s insistent millenarianism is troublesome."
"They have often dismissed as unorthodox, if not heretical, any claim of personal contact with the Imam or speculation about his arrival."
"Several ayatollahs opined that such talk about the Mahdi is unbecoming of a president or, worse, indicative of an unstable leader."
"These concerns were reflected in the fact that the Society of Combatant Clergy, a conservative body, was unable to endorse Ahmadinejad’s candidacy."
Defiance of the Supreme Leader by millions of Iranians just a day after he firmly endorsed Ahmadinejad threw the country into a political crisis.
Worldwide broadcasts of the beating and killing of protesters have undermined the regime’s religious credentials.
"Seeking a way out of this difficult situation, the Supreme Leader declared that the electoral disputes must be settled in through legal channels, not on the street."
"Given his role in justifying electoral fraud, this argument seems like an effort to buy time to clear the streets of demonstrators, put opposition leaders under severe physical and psychological stress, and isolate Mir Hossein Mousavi, the presumed winner of the real vote."
"Nonetheless, Khamenei’s invocation of the law echoes the demands of many conservative-pragmatists who lean toward Mousavi, who is not in a position to challenge Khamenei’s authority directly."
"Mousavi must carefully continue his legal campaign, without compromising the trust he has gained from the majority of Iranians."
He must stand by his two principal demands: nullification of the election and establishment of an impartial committee to rule on the government’s violations of the electoral law.
"Should Mousavi persuade Khamenei to reconsider his position, the Supreme Leader’s hold on power will be shaken."
"If Khamenei holds fast, Mousavi cannot gain the presidency, but he will continue to represent the hopes of the majority of Iranians who differ dramatically with their government."
"For now, what will happen depends on Mousavi’s perseverance."
Anatomy of Chavez
Hugo Chavez's almost 8 years in power in Venezuela – which he will seek to extend in presidential elections next month &#45;&#45; seems to defy economic analysis.
"Indeed, any and all economic examination of Chavez’s Venezuela confirms Edgar R. Fiedler’s quip that if you &quot;ask five economists something, you will get five answers...or six if one of them is a Harvard graduate.&quot;"
Some people see in Chavez an innovative statesman who has seized an almost magical moment – the windfall Venezuela has received from today’s sky high oil prices &#45;&#45; to change the rules of the game in his country.
A few key indicators appear to support this. Foreign investment has grown recently from $1.5 billion (2004) to $2.5 billion (2005).
"In that two year period, Chavez stepped on the gas for his social reforms – education, health care, etc. – and also in regard to breaking down the country’s excessive concentrations of wealth."
"Although over 70% of national income remains in the hands of just 20% of the population, Chavez has forced big foreign oil companies to pay much higher royalties and has started expropriating unproductive land and industrial facilities."
"With oil prices now six times higher than they were when he came to power, Chavez presided over economic growth of 9% in 2005 and as much again in the first quarter of 2006."
"Above all, however, he has achieved a 6.3% effective reduction of poverty, after taking over a country whose vast majority - 80% - was perched between poverty and squalor."
"Seen in this angle, Chavez appears to have real achievements."
"But there is another, darker, angle from which to view his presidency."
"It is possible to see in Chavez but another Latin American populist sorcerer's apprentice, one whose political shelf life will expire whenever oil prices begin their inevitable shift backward."
"To those who think that this is the case, Chavez is not an innovator but someone who is merely squandering Venezuela’s oil wealth in the same way that governments did following the oil shocks of the 1970's."
The notion of specific &quot;Chavist&quot; growth can also be challenged.
"The highest growth achieved in the Chavez years is lower than Venezuela’s average during the second half of the 1990's, when oil was the exclusive domain of the private sector."
"Moreover, growth under Chavez seems to reflect an increase in domestic consumption resulting from the flow of petrodollars and nothing more fundamental, as oil remains the economy’s only real engine."
"So nothing Chavez has done translates into a fundamental improvement in, or diversification of, Venezuela’s economy."
"Private investors appear to understand this, as such investment in Venezuela grew by a mere 3% between 2000 and 2004. Suspiciously, the country’s central bank refuses to publish that figure for 2005."
Only one out of every ten Venezuelan companies polled states any intention of making middle or long term investments such as renovating existing industrial plants or building new ones.
"True, businessmen have tempered their criticisms of Chavez and seem eager to participate in the profit feast brought about by increased consumption."
But they may also be waiting for the first external shock to puncture the Chavez balloon before they pounce.
These two versions of the Chavez years are both distorted &#45;&#45; to a certain degree &#45;&#45; by nostalgia.
Those who see him as successful have the 1960's and 1970's as their dream fantasy.
Their main arguments are reminiscent the arguments put forward by those who backed the Cuban Revolution.
"Those who revile Chavez often do so in the name of the ‘Washington Consensus,’ that mix of capitalism and democracy that was almost hegemonic across the continent in the 1980's and 1990's."
"Thus, Chavez is portrayed as a return to the Latin American populist heresy, a heresy that must be resisted because it affects not only the country with the largest oil reserves outside the Middle East, but also because it may tempt the rest of Latin America down that road."
But history never truly repeats itself.
The years of the biggest transformation demands in Latin America or those of its docility to economic orthodoxy will not come back because we can remember them.
"Especially, the view of the Washington Consensus seems irretrievable; its &quot;grand tale&quot; is now beyond the pale in the region's societies after it did not deliver the promised prosperity."
"Yet one thing is clear: Chavez was the first ruler of his generation to recognize the region’s fatigue and disillusion with neo-liberalism, and to propose new rules of the game."
"In the end these may not be the rules he envisions today, but neither are they a spent force."
To believe that one can accurately foresee what will become of Chavez and Venezuela brings to mind another warning by Fiedler: &quot;He who lives by the crystal ball must sooner or later learn to chew glass.&quot;
Anatomy of Fear
How does your brain form its most significant memories?
Studies of fear in rats have helped us learn much here.
"Although people and rats fear different things, the manner in which the rat and human brain and body respond to danger is similar."
"Because fear is at the core of many human pathologies, from panic attacks to posttraumatic stress disorder, breakthroughs in understanding the brain's fear system may lead to new ways to treat these disorders."
"The core of the brain's fear system is found in a region called the ""amygdala""."
"This region receives information from all the senses and in turn controls the various networks that inspire the speeding heart, sweaty palms, wrenching stomach, muscle tension and hormonal floods that characterize being afraid."
"A rat's amygdala responds to natural dangers (rats fear cats without having to learn to do so) and learns about new dangers (sounds, sights and smells that occur in anticipation of cats and other threats)."
"It is through studies of the way the brain learns about stimuli, such as the sounds that precede danger, that our systems for learning about fear, and memory as a whole, have been elucidated through rat studies."
There is also evidence that amygdala of reptiles and birds have similar functions.
"Studies of humans with damage to the amygdala, due to neurological disease or as a consequence of surgery to control epilepsy, show that our brains also work in this same basic way."
"The implication of these findings is that early on (perhaps since dinosaurs ruled the earth, or even before) evolution hit upon a way of wiring the brain to produce responses likely to keep an organism alive in dangerous situations."
The solution was so effective that it has not changed much over the ages.
"Obviously, this is not the whole story."
"Once the fear system detects and starts responding to danger, a brain such as the human brain, with its enormous capacity for thinking, reasoning, and musing, begins to assess what is going on and tries to determine what to do."
This is when feelings of fear arise.
"But in order to be consciously fearful you have to have a sufficiently complex kind of brain, one aware of its own activities."
"While this is undoubtedly true of the human brain, it is not at all clear which (if any) other animals have this capacity."
"So, in evolutionary terms, the fear system of the brain is very old."
"It is likely that it was designed before the brain was capable of experiencing what we humans refer to as ""fear"" in our own lives."
"If true, then the best way to understand how the fear system works is not to chase the elusive brain mechanisms of feelings of fear, but to study the underlying neural systems that evolved as behavioral solutions to problems of survival."
"In order to understand feelings, we need to step back from their superficial expression in our conscious experiences and dig deeper into how the brain works when we have these experiences."
"A fundamental discovery has been that the brain has multiple memory systems, each devoted to different kinds of memory functions. For memories of fear arousing experiences, two systems are particularly important."
"Take this example: if you return to the scene of a recent accident, you are likely to have a physical reaction that reflects activation of memories stored in the amygdala."
"At the same time, you will be reminded of the accident, will remember where you were going, who you were with, and other details."
"These are explicit (conscious) memories mediated by another system, the ""hippocampus""."
"In contrast, memories mediated by the amygdala are unconscious."
These are memories in the sense that they cause your body to respond in a particular way as a result of past experiences.
The conscious memory of the past experience and the physiological responses elicited thus reflect the operation of two separate memory systems that operate in parallel.
"Only by taking these systems apart in the brain have neuro-scientists been able to figure out that these are different kinds of memory, rather than one memory with multiple forms of expression."
Many of the most common psychiatric disorders that afflict humans are emotional disorders; many of these are related to the brain's fear system.
"According to America's Public Health Service, about 50% of mental problems reported in the US (other than those related to substance abuse) are accounted for by anxiety disorders, including phobias, panic attacks, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, and generalized anxiety."
Research into the brain mechanisms of fear helps us to understand why these emotional conditions are so hard to control.
"Neuro-anatomists have shown that the pathways that connect the amygdala with the thinking brain, the neocortex, are not symmetrical - the connections from the cortex to the amygdala are considerably weaker than those from the amygdala to the cortex."
"This may explain why, once an emotion is aroused, it is so hard for us to turn it off at will."
"The asymmetry of these connections may also help us understand why psychotherapy is often such a difficult and prolonged process, for it relies on imperfect channels of communication between brain systems involved in cognition and emotion."
Studies of the basic biology of the fear system are likely to continue to reveal important information both about where our emotions come from and what goes wrong in emotional disorders.
"As we learn more, we may begin to figure out how to better treat - and even prevent - these conditions."
Anatomy of Thatcherism
"London – Thirty years ago this month, Margaret Thatcher came to power. Although precipitated by local conditions, the Thatcher (or more broadly the Thatcher-Reagan) revolution became an instantly recognizable global brand for a set of ideas that inspired policies to free markets from government interference."
"Three decades later, the world is in a slump, and many people attribute the global crisis to these very ideas."
"Indeed, even beyond the political left, the Anglo-American model of capitalism is deemed to have failed."
It is held culpable for the near financial meltdown.
"But 30 years of hindsight enable us to judge which elements of the Thatcher revolution should be preserved, and which should be amended in the light of today’s global economic downturn."
Most obviously in need of amendment is the view that minimally managed and regulated markets are both more stable and more dynamic than those subject to extensive government intervention.
"The Thatcherite assumption, in other words, was that government failure is far more menacing to prosperity than market failure."
This was always bad history.
"The record shows that the period 1950-1973, when government intervention in market economies was at its peacetime height, was uniquely successful economically, with no global recessions and faster rates of GDP growth – and growth of GDP per capita – than in any comparable period before or since."
One can argue that economic performance would have been even better with less government intervention.
But perfect markets are no more available than perfect governments.
All we have are comparisons between what happened at different times.
What these comparisons show is that markets plus government have done better than markets minus government.
"Nevertheless, by the 1970’s the pre-Thatcher political economy was in crisis."
The most notorious symptom of this was the emergence of “stagflation” – simultaneously rising inflation and unemployment.
Something had gone wrong with the system of economic management bequeathed by John Maynard Keynes.
"In addition, government spending was on the rise, labor unions were becoming more militant, policies to control pay kept breaking down, and profit expectations were falling."
"It seemed to many as though government’s reach had come to exceed its grasp, and that either its grasp had to be strengthened or its reach had to be reduced."
Thatcherism emerged as the most plausible alternative to state socialism.
"Nigel Lawson was Thatcher’s second Chancellor of the Exchequer, or finance minister."
"Out of the government’s anti-inflationary efforts emerged the “Lawson doctrine,” first stated in 1984 and broadly accepted by governments and central banks ever since."
"“The conquest of inflation,” Lawson said, “should...be the objective of macroeconomic policy."
And the creation of conditions conducive to growth and employment should be...the objective of microeconomic policy.”
"This proposition overturned the previous Keynesian orthodoxy that macroeconomic policy should aim at full employment, with the control of inflation left to wage policy."
"Yet, despite all the “supply side” reforms introduced by Thatcherite governments, unemployment has been much higher since 1980 than in the 1950’s and 1960’s – 7.4% on average in the United Kingdom, compared to 1.6% in the earlier decades."
What about inflation targeting?
"Here, too, the record since 1980 has been patchy, despite the huge deflationary pressure exerted by low-wage competition from Asia."
Inflation in 1950-1973 and 1980-2007 was about the same – just over 3% – while inflation targeting has failed to prevent a succession of asset bubbles that have brought recessions in their wake.
Nor has Thatcherite policy succeeded in one of its chief aims – to reduce the share of government spending in national income.
The most one can say is that it halted the rise for a time.
"Now public spending is on the increase again, and record peacetime deficits of 10% or more of GDP stretch ahead for years."
"In de-regulating financial markets worldwide, the Thatcher-Reagan revolution brought about the corruption of money, without improving on the previous growth of wealth – except for the very wealthy."
The average world citizen would have been 20% richer had world GDP per capita grown at the same rate between 1980 and 2007 as it did between 1950 and 1973 – and this despite China’s high growth rates in the past 20 years.
"Furthermore, in unleashing the power of money, the Thatcherites, for all their moralizing, contributed to the moral decay of the West."
Against these formidable minuses are three pluses.
The first is privatization.
"By returning most state-owned industries to private ownership, the Thatcher revolution killed off state socialism."
"The British privatization program’s greatest influence was in the former communist states, to which it gave the ideas and techniques needed to dismantle grossly inefficient command economies."
This gain must be preserved in the face of the current clamor to “nationalize” banks.
Thatcherism’s second success was to weaken trade unions.
"Set up to protect the weak against the strong, labor unions had become, by the 1970’s, enemies of economic progress, a massive force of social conservatism."
It was right to encourage a new economy to grow outside these congealed structures.
"Finally, Thatcherism put paid to the policy of fixing prices and wages by central diktat or by tripartite “bargains” between governments, employers, and trade unions."
"These were the methods of fascism and communism, and they would, in the end, have destroyed not just economic, but political, liberty."
Political pendulums often swing too far.
"In rebuilding the shattered post-Thatcherite economy, we should be careful not to revive the failed policies of the past."
I still find fruitful Keynes’s distinction between the agenda and the non-agenda of politics.
"As long as central government takes responsibility for maintaining a high and stable level of employment, Keynes thought, most of the rest of economic life can be left free of official interference."
Building a proper division of responsibility between state and market from this insight is today’s main task.
Anatomy of the Party of Power
"More than anything else, Vladimir Putin understands power: how to get it; how to consolidate it."
"His predecessor, Boris Yeltsin, knew how to seize power but not how to consolidate it, which partly explains why power seeped away throughout his presidency."
"President Putin's success, however, has bred its own problem: he consolidated power at the center so well that opposition is brewing in Russia's regions."
"Yeltsin's biggest failing was in not creating a viable, non-ideological party - a ""party of power"" - to buttress his regime."
"He tried to do so in 1995, but the Chechen War drove Russia's democrats away from him."
"Moreover, his efforts here were amazingly clumsy."
Yeltsin once spoke about his scheme to link two centrists.
"With ""Ivan Rybkin (then Duma's speaker),"" Yelstin said on TV, ""leading the left flank, and Viktor Chernomyrdin (then prime minister) leading the right, we will encircle everyone."""
"But by linking both parties to his very unpopular self, Yeltsin damaged both."
"Perhaps if both wings had united, that single party would have appeared as an unbeatable juggernaut."
"Such unity, however, was impossible, for an obvious Russian reason: the faction leaders hated each other too much to get together, even for their own good."
"Indeed, Rybkin was told to pretend to be opposed to Yeltsin's policies, but when he did object, Chernomyrdin summoned Rybkin to his office for ""clarifications."""
"When businessmen learned about this ""dressing down,"" they became afraid to finance Rybkin's party."
"In the end, Rybkin went unelected and Chernomyrdin's `Our Home Is Russia' (NDR) came third."
"Yeltsin failed to consolidate political support for other reasons as well, the most important being his unwillingness (or inability) to forcefully manipulate the media."
"Of course, transformation of the presidential administration into a public relations machine began under Yeltsin when Anatoli Chubais directed the 1996 election campaign."
"Before that, the Kremlin had little idea about how to manipulate the new media outlets that Russia's infant democracy had produced."
"Today's Kremlin, however, is full of clever ideas about how to control and intimidate newspapers, radio, and television."
"In the 1995 election, Yeltsin would have been happy if the NDR secured 25% to 30% of the vote."
Putin is far more ambitious.
"He will be displeased if `United Russia' - the ""party of power"" he has built - wins less than 50% of the seats in the next Duma."
But are the results of the parliamentary elections due this coming January truly a foregone conclusion?
Or are surprises in store for Putin?
"Surprises seem likely because Russia's political dividing line has shifted, but the President's political strategy hasn't recognized that fact."
"Indeed, he appears set to be waging battles against the communists that are already won."
"Putin's re-consolidation of power within the Kremlin, after much of it escaped to the regions during the Yeltsin years, dramatically shifted Russia's political dividing line."
"In the past, that dividing line separated right and left, but the line at the forthcoming elections will run between the federal center and the regions."
"The loss of political power in the regions (regional governors, for example, were evicted from the Duma's upper house) has incited serious discontent that is spilling over into the public sphere."
"That discontent will likely gather momentum as elections near, which may be enough to stop the federal authorities from meeting their strategic goal of winning an unchallengeable majority of seats in the new Duma."
Vast administrative resources are being used to secure the desired result.
"But Russia's bureaucracy is no disciplined machine, and the lower reaches of the state's `vertical' power structure may well ally themselves - quietly - with regional authorities to prevent the center from gaining too many votes."
"Regional administrations also possess their own instruments of obstruction, including propaganda outlets in the regional media, as well as the ability to manipulate ballot papers."
"Indeed, President Putin's failure to ""reconquer"" his home city of St. Petersburg, now controlled by a bitter political opponent of the President, Vladimir Yakovlev, demonstrates the bureaucratic powers that local leaders retain."
So the real issue in the forthcoming Duma elections will be how powerfully regional elites confront Putin.
Their ability to defy the president may be aided by the fact that the Kremlin is failing to recognize the potential of their challenge.
"So far, the main target of its campaign is the communists, whom Kremlin political operatives hope to destroy in the way they destroyed Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov and former Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov, head of the Fatherland party, who were the leading non-communist challengers during Putin's first presidential campaign."
That focus on the battle with the communists may allow other forces to sneak into the Duma by the back door.
The Boris Nemtsov/Sergei Kiriyenko `Union of Right Forces' (SPS) is one party that seems certain to benefit in this way.
"Indeed, the SPS electorate is growing faster than that of other parties."
"In principle, all of Russia's political elites appear to have - or pretend to have - resigned themselves to a political landscape with Putin alone on the mountaintop and everyone else consigned to the valley below."
"The upcoming elections won't knock the president off that mountain, but his `party of power' is not omnipotent enough to silence the dissenting echoes rising from below."
An Autumn Abyss?
"BERLIN – In the coming months, several serious regional economic and political crises could combine into one mega-watershed, fueling an intense global upheaval."
"In the course of the summer, the prospect of a perilous fall has become only more likely."
The drums of war are being banged ever more loudly in the Middle East.
No one can predict the direction in which Egypt’s Sunni Islamist president and parliamentary majority will lead the country. But one thing is clear: the Sunni Islamists are decisively altering the region’s politics.
"This regional re-alignment need not be necessarily anti-Western, but it surely will be if Israel and/or the United States attack Iran militarily."
"Meanwhile, civil war is raging in Syria, accompanied by a humanitarian catastrophe."
"To be sure, President Bashar al-Assad’s regime will not survive, but it is determined to fight until the end."
Syria’s balkanization among the country’s diverse ethnic and religious groups is a clearly predictable result.
"Indeed, a Bosnia-type scenario can no longer be excluded, while the prospect of the Syrian government’s loss of control over its chemical weapons poses an immediate threat of military intervention by Turkey, Israel, or the US."
"Moreover, the Syrian civil war has become a proxy in an openly declared battle for regional hegemony between Iran on one side and Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey, and the US on the other."
"Staying on the sidelines of this Arab-Western coalition, Israel is playing its cards close to its chest."
"Iran, for its part, has proclaimed Syria an indispensable ally, and is determined to prevent regime change there by all available means."
Does that mean that Hezbollah’s militias in neighboring Lebanon will now become directly involved in Syria’s civil war?
Would such intervention revive Lebanon’s own long civil war of the 1970’s and 1980’s?
Is there a threat of a new Arab-Israeli war hanging over the Middle East?
"And, as Kurds inside and outside of Syria grow more assertive, Turkey, with its large and long-restive Kurdish population, is also growing restive."
"At the same time, the regional struggle currently playing out in Syria is becoming increasingly entangled with the other major source of war sounds: Iran’s nuclear program."
"Indeed, parallel to the Syrian drama, the rhetoric in the confrontation between Israel and Iran over the program has become dramatically harsher."
Both sides have maneuvered themselves into a dead-end.
"If Iran gives in and agrees to a sustainable diplomatic solution, the regime will lose face on a critical domestic issue, jeopardizing its legitimacy and survival."
"From the regime’s point of view, the legacy of the 1979 Islamic revolution is at stake. But the international sanctions are hurting, and Iran risks losing Syria."
Everything points to the regime’s need for success – now more than ever – concerning its nuclear program.
"Similarly, Israel’s government has backed itself into a domestic policy trap of its own."
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Defense Minister Ehud Barak cannot accept a nuclear-armed Iran.
"They do not fear a nuclear attack against Israel, but rather a nuclear arms race in the region and a dramatic shift in power to Israel’s disadvantage."
"From their point of view, Israel must either convince the US to attack Iran and its nuclear plants or take on the maximum risk of using its own military forces to do so."
"Both sides have substantially reduced their options, thereby limiting the possibility of a diplomatic compromise. And that means that both sides have stopped thinking through the consequences of their actions."
"Everywhere there is talk of a “military option,” which means air strikes. But, while advocates speak of a limited “surgical operation,” what they are really talking about is the start of two wars: an aerial war, led by the US and Israel, and an asymmetric war, led by Iran and its allies."
And what if this “military option” fails?
"What if Iran becomes a nuclear power, the region’s democratic movements are swept away by a wave of anti-Western Islamic solidarity, and the Iranian regime emerges even stronger?"
"Iran, too, evidently has not thought its position through to its logical conclusion. What does it stand to gain from nuclear status if it comes at the cost of regional isolation and harsh United Nations sanctions for the foreseeable future?"
And what if it triggers a regional nuclear arms race?
"A war in the Persian Gulf – still the world’s gas station – would affect oil exports for some time, and energy prices would skyrocket, dealing a severe blow to a global economy that is teetering on the brink of recession."
"China, already in economic trouble, would be hit hardest, along with the whole of East Asia."
"With the US also economically weakened and facing a presidential election, America’s leadership ability would be seriously constricted."
"And could a weakened Europe cope with an oil shock at all? &nbsp;A regional and global security shock caused by asymmetric warfare could add still further to the world economy’s troubles, causing exports to slump even more."
Respice finem!
"(“Consider the end”), the Romans used to say."
World leaders need to take this timeless wisdom to heart. And that applies doubly to Europeans.
It would be absurd if we had to suffer a real catastrophe again in order to understand what European integration has always been about.
Antarctica’s Point of No Return
POTSDAM – Recent satellite observations have confirmed the accuracy of two independent computer simulations that show that the West Antarctic ice sheet has now entered a state of unstoppable collapse.
The planet has entered a new era of irreversible consequences from climate change.
The only question now is whether we will do enough to prevent similar developments elsewhere.
"What the latest findings demonstrate is that crucial parts of the world’s climate system, though massive in size, are so fragile that they can be irremediably disrupted by human activity."
"It is inevitable that the warmer the world gets, the greater the risk that other parts of the Antarctic will reach a similar tipping point; in fact, we now know that the Wilkes Basin in East Antarctica, as big or even bigger than the ice sheet in the West, could be similarly vulnerable."
"There are not many human activities whose impact can reasonably be predicted decades, centuries, or even millennia in advance."
"The fallout from nuclear waste is one; humans’ contribution to global warming through greenhouse-gas emissions from burning fossil fuels, and its impact on rising sea levels, is another."
"Indeed, the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report stated, in uncharacteristically strong terms, that the sea level is “virtually certain” to continue to rise in the coming centuries or millennia."
"Moreover, the greater our emissions, the higher the seas will rise."
But the recent revelations about Antarctica are different.
"Rather than reacting to global warming with gradual and predictable patterns of change, the West Antarctic ice sheet has suddenly “tipped” into a new state."
"A relatively small amount of melting beneath the Amundsen Sea’s ice shelf has pushed its grounding line to the top of a sub-glacial hill, from which it is now “rolling down.”"
"Simply put, one thermal kick was enough to initiate an internal dynamic that will now continue under its own momentum, regardless of any action that humans might take to prevent it."
"It is not completely clear whether humans have caused this tipping – though nothing like it has ever occurred during the 11,500-year Holocene period before humans started interfering with the planet’s energy balance."
But that is not the point. What is important is that we recognize the existence of gigantic parts of the earth’s climate system – such as West Antarctica’s three-quadrillion-ton ice sheet – that can be tipped when a fractional temperature rise occurs in key locations.
This risk is no longer merely theoretical.
"For the first time, findings based on observations and computer simulations all point to the same conclusion: the huge Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica has begun an irreversible ice discharge, and nothing can now halt the subsequent drainage of the entire basin. It has passed the point of no return."
That is why we must now focus on similar topographic conditions elsewhere.
"If an “ice plug” near the coast of Wilkes Basin melts or breaks off into icebergs, the basin’s huge quantities of water will drain into the ocean."
"Although no one knows precisely what might destabilize the Wilkes Basin, we can be fairly certain that further global warming, caused by greenhouse-gas emissions, will increase the risk."
The fact that sea levels will continue to rise is now clear. But we can still determine how high and how fast levels rise by controlling the degree of global warming that we cause.
"Climate change is caused by mankind, so the good news is that mankind can stop it by cutting greenhouse-gas emissions."
"Although West Antarctica’s fate is sealed, we may still be able to prevent the collapse of East Antarctica’s marine ice sheet. That means deciding – sooner rather than later – which path to follow."
The current path risks further destabilization in Antarctica; choosing the alternative path of a new energy system for the planet is our last best hope.
Ukraine’s Prisoner’s Dilemma
WASHINGTON – The European Union’s most important decision this fall will be whether to sign an Association Agreement with Ukraine at the EU summit in Vilnius on November 28-29.
"The issue will turn on whether Ukraine’s President, Viktor Yanukovych, fulfills one vital condition: a full pardon for political prisoner and former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko."
"The Association Agreement, which runs to some 1,200 pages, would remove almost all EU tariffs on Ukrainian goods, boosting the country’s long-term GDP by an estimated 12%."
"It would also establish a political, economic, and legal reform plan for the country, supported by roughly 60 state agencies in EU member countries."
"Although the Association Agreement does not lead automatically to EU membership, it is an important step in that direction."
"Under the Treaty of Rome, Ukraine, as a European country, qualifies as a potential EU member."
"But it would have to fulfill the EU’s “Copenhagen criteria,” established in 1993, which sets out the basic entry standards."
"The Copenhagen criteria are met when the candidate country has achieved “stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and respect for, and protection of, minorities”; can ensure the existence of “a functioning market economy and the capacity to cope with competition and market forces”; and has sufficient “administrative and institutional capacity” to adopt and enforce EU law and “take on the obligations of membership.”"
"Ukraine is a long way from achieving this, but signing an Association Agreement would pave the way toward entry talks, while also creating tremendous economic opportunities."
Ukraine’s alternative would be to join a Russian-dominated Customs Union that includes Belarus and Kazakhstan.
"Membership would require Ukraine to double import tariffs on EU goods, at an annual cost equivalent to 4% of GDP; and it would not even guarantee free trade among its members (Russia already applies trade sanctions against Belarus and Kazakhstan)."
The Customs Union thus appears to be little more than a Russian neo-imperialist venture.
"Unsurprisingly, Yanukovych has consistently stated his preference for an Association Agreement."
"His political future may depend on it. His advisers, and recent opinion polls, suggest that if he fails to sign a deal, he will lose the March 2015 presidential election."
The electoral math is stark.
"While 40% of Ukrainians, based mainly in Yanukovych’s electoral heartland in the east and south of the country, would prefer to join the Customs Union, 60% of voters see their future with or in the EU."
"Even allowing for widespread electoral fraud (which would hardly endear him to Brussels), Yanukovych would still struggle to win a majority."
It is not just the swing vote that Yanukovych needs to attract.
Ukraine’s powerful oligarchs are also looking West rather than East for business.
Many are fed up with the arbitrary imposition of trade barriers – affecting goods ranging from chocolate to steel pipes – in their former Soviet markets.
"EU markets, by contrast, are viewed as being not only bigger, but safer as well."
Meddling from Moscow has certainly focused minds in Kiev.
"Russia’s brief trade war in August frightened Yanukovych into pledging to fulfill all 11 of the EU’s legal and political conditions. These require Ukraine to overhaul its judiciary and law enforcement, and ensure greater adherence to democratic norms."
"The parliament currently is considering 15 bills along these lines, all of which have the full support of the main opposition parties."
"But the EU’s demand that Yanukovych pardon Tymoshenko, who narrowly lost the 2010 presidential election, may prove harder to satisfy."
"Tymoshenko was arrested in August 2011 and, after what was widely seen as a show trial, received a seven-year prison sentence for “abuse of power” (though she was not accused of benefiting personally) over a 2009 natural-gas deal with Russia."
An EU-appointed mediation commission that includes former Polish President Alexander Kwasniewski and former European Parliament President Pat Cox has proposed a solution.
"At the commission’s request, Yanukovych would pardon Tymoshenko, who would be allowed to travel to Germany for medical reasons."
"Yanukovych has not. Rather than a pardon, he wants parliament to pass a law allowing Tymoshenko to go to Germany for treatment, but on the condition that she would resume her prison sentence should she return to Ukraine."
The EU says that those terms are unacceptable.
Acquiescing in Tymoshenko’s political imprisonment would negate the very foundations of the legal and democratic standards that the EU purports to represent.
Any subsequent legal reform in Ukraine would appear hollow.
"Some argue that the EU should ease its conditions: the case of a single, albeit important, individual should not stand in the way of Ukraine’s future."
"But, far from this being a one-off case, the Tymoshenko affair exposes a deeper malaise."
"Even now, Yanukovych is attempting to amend tax rules in order to disqualify the popular Vitali Klitschko, a champion boxer and former German resident, from standing for President."
The corruption and lawlessness that characterizes Yanukovych’s Ukraine should spur the EU to hold fast both to the letter and the spirit of its conditions.
Time is not on Yanukovych’s side.
The European Council of Ministers will make its final decision on November 18.
"If Yanukovych has not amnestied Tymoshenko by then, the EU can, as the Polish MEP Jacek Saryusz-Wolski suggests, wait for a Ukrainian president that will uphold EU values."
Yanukovych will be the one blocking Ukraine’s path to the future.
And Free Flows the Nile
"NEW DELHI – For 18 days, during the ebb and flow of protest, it did not seem possible that the end of the Egyptian Revolution would come so suddenly, in a terse announcement that lasted no more than a half-minute: “President Hosni Mubarak has relinquished office….” With that, amidst roars of victory, an era was ended, reaffirming the old saying that “the graveyards of the world are full of those who considered themselves indispensable to their nations.”"
"In the days and weeks ahead, there could arise occasions when the news from Cairo is not uplifting, but let us never forget that Egypt has taken a giant step, which in reality is a giant step for all Arabs."
"After all, Egypt is the heart, brain, and nerve center of the Arab world."
"True, it once spawned the radical Muslim Brotherhood, but it also gave birth to Islamic socialism and anti-colonialism, Arab unity, and now a democratic affirmation of the people’s will."
Pernicious talk that Arabs do not want democracy has been exposed as the big lie it is.
"Egypt, in the great Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore’s memorable words, is the land “where the head is (now) held high and the mind is (now) without fear…” The consequences will be vast."
Ancient Arab lands are bestirred.
"Decades-old, apparently immovable autocracies are finding their hold on power unhinged; change is invading their static environs."
"Yesterday’s treaties, particularly those with the United States and Israel, will no longer inspire the same type of confidence they have long had as instruments of state policy."
"Memory of these 18 days is so crowded that it is difficult to separate one event from another, one phase from the next: the dramatic, the moving, the bizarre, and the unreal from the bathetic."
"But the thread that united all, the theme that remained unerringly constant, was the yearning for “change” – immediate, real, and tangible, not a promise or a tantalizing, unreachable mirage."
"Will this yearning travel beyond the Nile, as it did from Tunis to Cairo?"
This question haunts other Arab portals of power.
"And not just Arab; globally, foreign policies are being hurriedly – and somewhat confusedly – revised and rewritten."
This is why US policy oscillated so disconcertingly from Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s “Do not rush the pace or else the pro-democracy movement could well be hijacked” to President Barack Obama’s emphatic call for “change now.”
"Of course, a grave question arises about the now-ruling Supreme Council of the Military High Command in Egypt: How can the enforcers of the status quo become the agents of change?"
"But, then, military rule is only a temporary measure, or so we reason."
"The great Tunisian poet Abul-Qasim Al Shabi has captured poignantly the spirit of Egypt’s saga: “If one day the people want life, then fate will arise…night fade away, chains broken…” That, in essence, is what the young in Egypt have done."
Their idiom is current; their instruments of change are today’s electronic media.
"They – and we – are very far from the world that Mubarak, or the great Gamal Abdel Nasser, knew and understood."
The Egyptian revolution now faces the exacting task that confronts all successful revolutions: how to define the future.
"Like the Ottoman Empire’s fragmentation in 1922 or Nasser’s overthrow of King Farouk’s regime in 1952, the current transformation, too, must be shaped."
And how that future is shaped will determine whether or not Mubarak’s end marks the beginning of political transformation throughout the Middle East.
That is the possibility that is shaking governments from Washington to Beijing.
It is not just the reliability of the Suez Canal and oil exports that are now in doubt; decades of fixed strategic certainties must now be reexamined.
"Consider Israel, which has watched the events in Cairo with a degree of worry unfelt since January 1979, when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini unseated the Shah of Iran."
"That strategic nightmare cost Israel and the US their closest ally in the region, one that was soon transformed into an implacable enemy."
"Israel’s two most recent wars – against Hezbollah in Lebanon in 2006, and against Hamas in Gaza in 2009 – were fought against groups sponsored, supplied, and trained by Iran."
"Clearly, Israeli-Palestinian negotiations will also now lie unattended as Israel concentrates on developments in Egypt."
"Above all, Israel must wonder if the peace treaty with Egypt will hold, and, if not, how to carry out the massive restructuring of its defense posture that will be required."
"But it is not only the fate of Israel that has now shocked US policy, in particular, to its core."
"Egypt, after all, has been the cornerstone of America’s balancing act in the Middle East – and the Islamic world – for three decades."
"The Egypt-Israel peace treaty has kept Egypt comfortably neutralized, freeing the US to commit its strategic resources elsewhere."
"In turn, Egypt, propped up by massive US aid, has secured the region from a larger conflagration, even though the Israel-Palestine conflict has continued to smolder."
"Herein lies the core of the dilemma for the US: it wants Egypt’s basic state apparatus to survive, so that the levers of power do not fall into the wrong hands."
"This requires the US to be seen as siding with the public’s demand for change, yet to avoid being identified with political immobility."
There is reason to feel reassured by Obama’s reactions.
"He termed Mubarak’s departure a display of “the power of human dignity,” adding that “the people of Egypt have spoken, their voices have been heard, and Egypt will never be the same.”"
"But nothing that Obama, or anyone else, says can answer the question now occupying the attention of senior US officials: Will the coming of popular sovereignty to Egypt inevitably lead to anti-Americanism?"
One Hundred Days of Solitude
"SANTIAGO – When violence flared up in Ukraine and protesters began dying at the hands of government agents, the European Union threatened sanctions against Ukrainian officials responsible for “violence and excessive force.”"
"President Viktor Yanukovych fled Kyiv, leaving behind a private zoo with exotic pigs and goats – and also the foreign ministers of Germany, France, and Poland, who were in town trying to broker a deal to end the violence."
"But when violence flared up – virtually simultaneously – in Venezuela and protesters began dying at the hands of government agents, the Organization of American States raised its voice to announce that...it would not raise its voice."
"The situation was up to Venezuela to sort out, the OAS stated."
Foreign ministers from other Latin American countries are nowhere to be seen in Caracas – certainly not denouncing repression and demanding an end to the violence.
"Meanwhile, the body count keeps rising."
The contrast highlights what everyone already knows: Latin America’s regional institutions are weak – even weaker than Europe’s.
"But it also reveals something else: a morally crooked logic that condemns governments and leaders to remain silent in the face of aggression, repression, and even death, because to say anything would be tantamount to “intervention” in another country’s internal affairs."
It was not always like this.
"Not long ago in Latin America, life and liberty were deemed to be universal rights, to be defended across national borders."
My father was a Chilean lawyer and human-rights activist.
"General Augusto Pinochet kicked him and our family out of the country, and I spent my adolescence and early adulthood in exile, sharing hopes and fears with other expatriates from Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay."
"None of us – and no one on the Latin American left – would have doubted for a moment that defending human rights was everyone’s responsibility, and that the international community should come down hard on governments that tortured and killed their own people."
"In Pinochet’s Chile or General Jorge Rafael Videla’s Argentina, anyone who complained about government-sponsored violence was painted as a member of an international communist conspiracy."
"Today, anyone who complains about violence in Venezuela is, according to President Nicolás Maduro, a fascist and a lackey of the American empire."
"Everything has changed, yet everything remains the same."
"Yes, the situation in Venezuela must be sorted out by Venezuelans."
The problem is that some Venezuelans today cannot march peacefully on the streets without being shot at.
"Some Venezuelans cannot speak freely to their fellow citizens, because each and every television station that would carry their words has been muzzled or driven off the air."
And some Venezuelans cannot be sure their rights will be respected.
"Terms in office have expired for the prosecutor-general, members of the national election commission, and supreme court justices, but no successors have been named, because Maduro is unwilling to negotiate with the opposition and lacks the two-thirds majority in the National Assembly needed to appoint officials of his choosing."
"Venezuelans would like nothing better than to be the ones who decide their own destiny, but the democratic means to do so are being denied to them."
"Indeed, one of the key opposition leaders, Leopoldo López, has been arrested on ludicrous charges of “inciting crime.”"
It would have been preposterous to tell Ukrainian demonstrators facing government storm troopers to just grin and bear it without any external solidarity or support.
It is just as preposterous to tell Venezuelan demonstrators the same thing.
"In these circumstances, the principle of self-determination, so beloved of foreign ministries everywhere, becomes an empty slogan."
Perhaps the saddest of all foreign reactions came from the University of Chile’s student federation.
"Using language reminiscent of the Stalinist 1950’s, the federation – which has led student protests demanding better education in Chile – condemned their Venezuelan counterparts for “defending the old order” and “deviating from the path the people have chosen.”"
"The problem with this argument (if one can call it that) is that “the people” do not speak with one voice, nor do their pronouncements fall fully formed from the sky."
"To figure out what real people actually want and respond accordingly, democracies have procedures, constitutional guarantees, and individual rights."
"When these are trampled upon, as they have been in Venezuela, people can neither speak freely nor choose their path."
It is equally silly to argue that Maduro’s actions must be legitimate because he came to power through an election.
A democratically elected leader retains legitimacy only to the extent that he or she behaves democratically once in office.
"As Georgetown professor Hector Schamis recently recalled, António de Oliveira Salazar in Portugal, Alfredo Stroessner in Paraguay, and Suharto in Indonesia attained power through elections, yet no history book calls them democratic."
"Yanukovych, too, won an election, but he will be remembered mostly for the bloodshed he unleashed, the bankruptcy that now faces Ukraine’s economy, and, of course, his private zoo and stable of Ferraris."
"Venezuelans, like Ukrainians, should know that they are not alone."
Their struggle for democratic rights is everyone’s struggle.
"People in Latin America know this, even if their leaders are not always willing to say it out loud."
Mercosur Blue
"SANTIAGO – When the leaders of Mercosur met in Caracas this week, the usual bluster about standing up to imperialism filled the air. But so did the unmistakable scent of decay."
"Mercosur is usually described as a trade grouping; in fact, it has been a political creation from the start."
"Brazil, the regional powerhouse, always viewed it as a counterweight to the United States in hemispheric affairs."
Peronist governments in Argentina used it to hype integration while doing little or nothing to remove actual barriers to trade.
"With the entrance of Hugo Chávez’s Venezuela in 2006, the lurch toward populism became unmistakable."
"As a Chilean government minister late last decade, I remember the frustration of attending Mercosur gatherings (Chile is an associate member). They were long on posturing and endless speeches, but short on substantive agreements about anything."
"At the 2006 summit in Córdoba, when Chávez and Fidel Castro dueled over who could deliver the longest and most rambling address, spirits were running high."
"Bolivia, also governed by a charismatic populist, was keen to develop closer ties. Ecuador soon followed suit."
And a smattering of smaller countries in Central America and the Caribbean fell into political line in exchange for generous infusions of Venezuelan cash and oil.
"Back then, Mercosur leaders could claim to offer an “alternative development model” for the region."
No more.
"This week in Caracas, the mood was funereal."
"The host, Chávez’s successor Nicolás Maduro, confronts a collapsing economy and tensions within his own party."
"Despite relatively high oil prices, Venezuela has a large fiscal deficit and falling foreign-exchange reserves."
"The inflation rate is the region’s highest, and the economy is stagnating."
"In the face of popular frustration with worsening living conditions, Maduro’s government has relied on violent repression to put an end to street protests."
Opposition leader Leopoldo López spent months in a military prison before recently being put on trial.
Institutions like Human Rights Watch have repeatedly denounced the government’s rights violations and restrictions on civil liberties.
"Argentina’s president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, arrived in Caracas hoping to rouse support in her fight against the so-called vulture funds that bought her country’s sovereign bonds on the cheap and have successfully sued for payment in full."
But Fernández found that her colleagues’ polite words of encouragement mattered little.
The US Supreme Court’s decision last month to uphold a lower court’s ruling against Argentina put her in an impossible situation.
Paying the recalcitrant bondholders would mean losing face and possibly triggering a salvo of copycat lawsuits; not paying would mean technical default and all of its attendant costs.
She chose the latter option.
"Access to foreign capital matters for Fernández, because, like Maduro, she faces a stalled economy and a growing dollar shortage."
"Domestic stabilization measures earlier this year bought her some time, yet fear of a recession remains."
"In an effort to regain access to capital markets, her economic team patched up things with the Paris Club of sovereign creditors and Spain’s Repsol (the former owner of nationalized oil giant YPF); but the fight with the vultures has set the country back."
"With a presidential election looming in October 2015, most potential candidates (even those from her own party) are quickly distancing themselves from her authoritarian style and troubled economic legacy."
"In Bolivia, President Evo Morales has resorted to legal and constitutional shenanigans to guarantee himself yet another term in office."
"After two terms, Morales would in theory be prohibited from running again."
"But Bolivia’s constitutional court has ruled that he can, because the adoption of a new constitution redefined the country as the Plurinational State of Bolivia;"
"Morales, therefore, served his first term as the head of a different state. When asked why he will run again, he replied – in a peculiar confession for a nationalist leader – that former Queen Sofía of Spain had encouraged him to “finish the job.”"
"In Ecuador, too, democratic institutions are under siege."
An independent report has chronicled 12 separate episodes of government meddling with court rulings.
A controversial gag law on the press that was enacted last year has already ended a major newspaper’s print edition.
"According to Catalina Botero, the outgoing rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission, “Ecuador is, along with Cuba, the country that most restricts freedom of expression.”"
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff faces a situation that is both similar to and different from that of her Mercosur colleagues.
Brazil is not the kind of country where a president can manipulate the constitution or close newspapers at will.
But malaise is in the air in Brasilia (leaving aside the World Cup thrashing delivered by Germany).
Brazil’s swift recovery from the 2008 financial crisis endeared it to international financial markets; but weak growth since then has left yesterday’s promise unfulfilled.
"Despite low unemployment, economic anxiety is on the rise – and is beginning to filter to the political realm."
"With Rousseff dropping in the polls and her opponents slowly gaining, the October presidential election – once thought to be a done deal – may be up for grabs."
"Absent from the Caracas summit was Chile’s president, Michelle Bachelet, who blamed a cold and a busy domestic agenda for her inability to travel."
"Political complications linked to a possible meeting with the Venezuelan opposition, which Bachelet had chosen not to attend (preferring to send her foreign minister), likely also played a part."
"Rousseff and Bachelet were natural candidates to lead the development of a moderate counterweight to the populism of Maduro, Fernández, Morales, and Correa."
"But Rousseff, like her predecessor, the popular Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, has chosen not to fill that role, instead cozying up to Venezuela."
"Chile is too small to go it alone, and Bachelet has her hands full with increasingly controversial tax, education, and constitutional reforms."
"Uruguay’s president, José Mujica, offered the best summary of what happened in Caracas: “We issued a statement.”"
"In other words, Mercosur remains an irrelevant talking shop – and the emergence of a modern center-left regional leadership in Latin America will have to wait."
The Third Way\u0027s Second Chance
SANTIAGO – Remember Tony Blair and Bill Clinton’s Third Way?
"It is back. The faces and names have changed, but the idea that governments can – and should – combine social-democratic values and modern liberal economics has returned to center stage."
"At a June 2000 gathering of leaders in Berlin, hosted by Germany’s then-Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, the Third Way seemed like the way of the future."
The gathering was Blair’s brainchild (though he did not attend because his wife had just had a child). But Clinton held forth eloquently on how new technologies could help to solve age-old social ills.
Leaders from Sweden and New Zealand argued that you could make the state both leaner and more effective.
"And the Third Way could travel well to what was once called the Third World, claimed South Africa’s Thabo Mbeki, Brazil’s Fernando Henrique Cardoso, and Chile’s Ricardo Lagos (I was present as part of Lagos’s delegation.)"
"Sadly, it was not to last."
The sound bites about progressive governance did not grow easily into a lasting political philosophy.
Al Gore traded Clintonomics for traditional populism and was defeated by George W. Bush.
Social democrats and their allies lost power in several European countries.
The war in Iraq and the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 caused a backlash against some of the policies advocated by Third Way leaders.
Fast forward to the present.
"Italy’s 39-year-old socialist prime minister, Matteo Renzi, is often described as his country’s last hope. He is promising (though not quite yet delivering) deep labor-market and fiscal reforms."
"After his electoral victory, Renzi received early kudos from Blair himself, who claimed that “Matteo has the dynamism, creativity, and toughness to succeed.”"
"Manuel Valls, France’s Socialist prime minister, is staking his political capital on an ambitious program of tax and spending cuts that does not enjoy the backing of his party’s traditionalist wing."
Critics from the orthodox left accuse him of “taking solutions from Blair and Schröder.”
Renzi and Valls – along with Pedro Sánchez of Spain’s Socialist Party – are part of a broader trend.
"With the world economy growing slowly, many center-left politicians are trying to mobilize markets and jump-start growth while investing in jobs and skills."
"Thus, dire need is the immediate explanation for the return of Third Way ideas."
It is not surprising that deeply indebted European governments are casting about for new social policies at a low fiscal cost.
But the harsh austerity advocated by Germany’s conservative government is not the same as the gradual adjustment sought by the new generation of Southern social democrats.
"Conservatives demand fiscal adjustment up front, whatever the consequences."
Modern social democrats who have read their Keynes understand that some immediate adjustment is necessary to make the program credible. But they also know that additional spending on human capital and physical infrastructure is necessary to limit the impact of fiscal retrenchment on employment and wages and to strengthen the economy’s growth potential.
The other reason for giving Third Way ideas a second hearing is that they work.
"Schröder’s reshaping of Germany’s labor market in the early 2000s was hugely controversial at the time; but, in retrospect, it turned Germany from the sick man of Europe into the continent’s export powerhouse."
The Nordic countries have led the way in experimenting with new ways to deliver public services while adopting “flexicurity” in labor relations.
"The result: they have achieved the trifecta of robust growth, high employment, and low public debt."
The effectiveness of these ideas is not limited to the rich countries of the North.
"The governments of the Concertación in Chile, Alan García in Peru, and Fernando Henrique Cardoso in Brazil all derived inspiration from the Blair-Clinton-Schröder agenda."
All had (or have) their share of controversies. But each undeniably launched an unprecedented period of democratic consolidation and economic modernization in their respective countries.
"In Brazil’s upcoming presidential election, both of the incumbent Dilma Rousseff’s main opponents are advocating policies that hark back to the good old days."
"In the case of Aécio Neves, who belongs to Cardoso’s party, that is not surprising. But it is remarkable in the case of socialist Marina Silva, who is calling for new trade pacts beyond Mercosur and for making the Central Bank of Brazil independent."
"Blair, who gave the Bank of England its full independence during his first week in office, would be proud."
"There are many differences across countries and time, but in the end four ideas are common to these successful experiences."
The first is policy pragmatism.
"What matters is what works, not what is ideologically pure."
"Instead of the sterile and endless debate as to whether the state should be big or small, it is more fruitful to ask what kind of state intervention, and where."
The second idea is fiscal realism.
"Budgetary prudence is both desirable (unsustainable deficits owe their name to the fact that they cannot be sustained) and progressive (when things blow up, it is the poor and the vulnerable who suffer the most)."
The third idea is modern welfarism.
"The state can and should redistribute income and wealth, but in doing so it should not weaken incentives to work and to save."
"Instead of simply providing handouts, governments should strive to guarantee good jobs at good wages."
"Finally, the Third Way is defined by progressive liberalism."
"Liberty and equality are complementary, not contradictory, principles."
"If the rules are designed properly, a society in which people decide and act freely can also be a society in which opportunities are fairly distributed."
"And conversely, without minimum opportunity for all, liberty is more illusory than real."
These four ideas animate a Third Way that is now enjoying a second chance – though it should have been the first choice all along.
The Lawless Sea
"SANTIAGO – The rule of law is almost entirely absent, with virtually no governance or policing."
"Illegal, unreported, and unregulated economic activities are common."
The powerful seize non-renewable resources at the expense of the powerless.
Environmental degradation is on the rise.
"That may sound like a description of a failed state, a desperately poor country beset by civil war, or a fictional dystopia. But it is none of the above."
The vast region (45% of the earth’s total surface) with next to no governance or rule of law is the high seas – nearly two-thirds of the global ocean that lies outside of any country’s jurisdiction.
How is this possible?
"After all, there is the legally binding 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which has been ratified by 166 states and the European Union."
"When UNCLOS was negotiated, the high seas were protected because they were inaccessible. But technological advances have enabled the exploitation of resources to extend farther and deeper than ever before."
"Fishing vessels can now operate across the ocean, and deep-sea drilling provides a growing proportion of our oil and gas."
UNCLOS has not kept pace with these developments.
"Industries and activities such as fisheries, shipping, and seabed mining are all regulated separately."
No governance framework is in place for emerging high-seas industries such as energy production.
"Transparency and accountability are weak, and there is little enforcement of rules."
"Moreover, the authorities have limited power to intercept vessels suspected of illegal activity."
"As a result, international cooperation to counter illegal fishing, smuggling of weapons and drugs, human trafficking, piracy, and the use of vessels in terrorist operations has been greatly hampered."
The consequences are dire.
"The ocean is our planet’s life-support-system, keeping it healthy and productive. But overfishing and pollution are causing tremendous damage."
"Marine debris causes the death by drowning, suffocation, or starvation of some one million seabirds and around 100,000 marine mammals (seals, whales, and dolphins) every year, not to mention the hazard posed to shipping by sea junk."
Plastic pollution – including pellets and micro plastics that enter food chains and can endanger human health – is a growing problem.
"Likewise, rising temperatures are reducing the ocean's oxygen-carrying capacity."
"The increasing uptake of carbon dioxide is causing ocean acidification and unprecedented changes in chemical and physical conditions, which in turn are affecting marine organisms and ecosystems."
The very life of the global ocean is under threat.
The time has come to bring the rule of law to the high seas.
"That is the purpose behind the Global Ocean Commission, an independent international body comprising former heads of state, ministers, and business leaders."
I am one of the commissioners.
"Last week, we proposed a rescue package that offers eight proposals to improve governance and restore ocean health."
"To strengthen high-seas governance, the Global Ocean Commission is joining the call for a new agreement under UNCLOS to protect biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction."
"Less than 1% of the high seas is currently protected, so it is crucial that this new agreement includes provisions for creating protected areas in the high seas."
"We are also proposing that an international convention be adopted to establish liability and compensation for both economic losses and ecological damage caused by offshore oil and gas exploration and production, which should also always be subject to legally binding safety protocols."
"Despite overfishing, a handful of countries – including the United States, Japan, and China, as well as the EU – are artificially supporting industrial high-seas fishing."
"Without subsidies, high-seas fisheries would not be financially viable."
"We are proposing that subsidies be capped immediately and eliminated within five years, and that countries be fully transparent about all fishing subsidies, about 60% of which directly encourage unsustainable practices."
"Moreover, to eliminate illegal fishing, which strips our oceans of marine life, we are calling for mandatory identification numbers and the tracking of all high-seas fishing vessels, and a total ban on transshipment at sea."
"By closing loopholes, we will finally close our ports and markets to illegally obtained fish."
An independent Global Ocean Accountability Board – the creation of which we are also proposing – should monitor progress on all of these fronts.
"In five years, if ocean decline continues and adequate prevention measures have not been implemented, the international community should consider turning the high seas – with the exception of those areas where action by regional fisheries management organizations is effective – into a regeneration zone where industrial fishing is forbidden."
"We can reverse ocean degradation, and turn the cycle of decline into a cycle of renewal."
"We know what needs to be done to restore ocean health, but we cannot do it alone."
"Delivering change will take political will and require joint efforts by governments, businesses, and civil society."
It can and must be done.
Join our mission at http://missionocean.me.
The time to act is now.
"Unless we respond with strong governance and the necessary tools to enforce regulations, ruthless pirate fishing will continue with impunity, there will be no binding international safety standards for deep sea oil and gas drilling, and plastic pollution and abandoned fishing gear will continue to proliferate."
"The more the global ocean struggles for life, the more our children and future generations will struggle for theirs."
Argentina’s Use and Abuse of Keyne
"BUENOS AIRES – “We are all Keynesians now,” Republican US President Richard Nixon famously said in 1971."
"Today, Axel Kicillof, Argentina’s Peronist economy minister, is echoing this sentiment."
Is he right?
Kicillof has gained international recognition as the public face of Argentina’s fight against the so-called vulture funds that want to extort full payment on Argentine bonds that they purchased for a few pennies on the dollar.
"But, before joining President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner’s cabinet, Kicillof was known in Argentine intellectual circles as the author of the book Volver a Keynes (Return to Keynes)."
"Last week, addressing a gilded ballroom packed with the elite of Argentina’s business community, Kicillof explained the government’s policies as a real-world application of Keynesian theories."
"In an hour-long speech, he made two key points."
"First, Kicillof attributed Argentina’s rapid economic growth in the years between its 2001 debt default and the 2008 global financial crisis to a Keynesian reflation of domestic aggregate demand."
"Keynes made a tremendous intellectual contribution in showing that supply in a market economy does not necessarily create its own demand, and that demand shortfalls can cause avoidable recessions."
Is this logic at work in Argentina?
"When the Argentine economy imploded in 2001, citizens lost their jobs and firms lost their access to credit, causing domestic demand to collapse."
Output fell sharply.
"But, as the country abandoned the one-to-one currency peg to the US dollar, the real exchange rate depreciated."
This shifted demand away from imports toward domestically produced goods.
"Next, a sharp rise in the price of food exports, heavily taxed in Argentina, augmented government revenues, providing the cash to finance increased expenditure."
"Given Argentina’s isolation from world financial markets, its central bank could cut domestic interest rates with limited fear of capital flight."
The fiscal and monetary impulse supported a rapid recovery.
"At first glance, Kicillof seems to be correct; this looks like textbook Keynesian reflation."
"But Keynes would not have approved of the macroeconomic policies pursued by Fernández and her predecessor and husband, the late Néstor Kirchner."
A Keynesian approach would ensure that demand does not fall short of supply.
The Kirchners have made sure that demand far exceeds supply.
The fact that Argentina’s annual inflation rate has stood at 20% or more for over a decade clearly illustrates this – and cannot be obscured by frozen utility rates and repeated manipulation of the consumer price index.
Kicillof’s second point was that Argentina’s businesses and consumers should not succumb to pessimism.
"Alluding to Keynes’s theories about self-fulfilling expectations, he warned that, if people expect things to go wrong, they will."
"Keynes did say – and it was a very important insight – that a capitalist economy resembles a beauty contest, with judges voting not for the most beautiful contestant, but for the contestant whom they believe their colleagues will find most beautiful."
Shifts in expectations can thus alter the outcome.
But Argentines are not pessimistic about the economy because other Argentines are pessimistic.
They are pessimistic because the economy’s fundamentals are weak – a fundamental difference.
"In 1991, the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman, who is perhaps the world’s leading Keynesian today, showed that whether or not expectations are self-fulfilling depends on underlying economic conditions."
"If an economy’s fundamentals are very weak, a crisis will inevitably occur sooner or later; if its fundamentals are very strong, a crisis never happens; and if they are in an intermediate range, a crisis happens if – and only if – people expect one."
"A couple of years ago, the eurozone was in the latter situation."
That is why European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s pledge to do “whatever it takes” to save the euro immediately brought the eurozone’s debt crisis to a halt.
"(The growth crisis, of course, has yet to be resolved.)"
But Argentina is not the eurozone.
There is nothing that Kicillof could say today that would have the soothing effect that Draghi’s promise did.
Argentines today feel much like Dorothy did when she first landed in Oz – they are not in the safe and familiar “Kansas” anymore.
But Keynes is not to blame.
The Humanities Crisi
NEW YORK – A striking symmetry is emerging in debates about the future of higher education around the world.
"On the one hand, there is growing concern that the United States and many European countries are failing to prepare enough university graduates in the fields driving the twenty-first century “knowledge economy,” such as engineering and information technology."
This fear has led to the narrowing of the concept of education to mean the acquisition of practical skills.
"On the other hand, the worry in some parts of Asia is that young people entering the work force with strong technical training lack sufficient experience “thinking outside the box.”"
This fear is manifesting itself in an incipient effort to expand education to include the cultivation of feeling and imagination.
Both movements are rooted in economic concerns.
"In the US, where most undergraduates bear at least part of the cost of their university education, political pressure is mounting to provide incentives like tuition discounts or loan forgiveness to students of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (the so-called STEM fields)."
"Cost-cutting measures, such as compressing traditional four-year degree programs into three years – thereby reducing or eliminating elective courses in “impractical” subjects like literature, philosophy, and fine arts – are also being discussed."
"Meanwhile, in Hong Kong, Singapore, and China, there are calls for extending university programs so that students can obtain a broad, liberal education, in the hope that graduates will be more inclined to experiment and innovate."
"Hong Kong University, for example, has extended its undergraduate programs from three years to four."
"But such a narrow, economics-based view fails to account for the larger questions of value that societies worldwide are facing."
"To be sure, progress in any field, from commerce and communications to health and environmental science, will become increasingly dependent on technological innovation, and thus on the high-order skills – acquired through intensive technical training – that drive it."
"It is also true, however, that such training does not provide an adequate foundation for addressing the more abstract, but profoundly important, questions that ultimately must guide global policy and decision-making."
For example:
· How can the imperative of economic development be reconciled with the need to limit climate change?
"· What does national sovereignty mean in a world where diseases, pollutants, and terrorists cross national borders at will?"
· Are there universal human rights that transcend conflicting claims of particular cultural traditions?
"· How should limited resources be distributed in order to provide opportunity and hope to young people, while treating the elderly with dignity and respect?"
"· What are a country’s obligations to refugees fleeing from persecution, poverty, or strife elsewhere?"
· How should we balance individual liberty and collective security?
"In answering such questions, advances in science and technology (for example, new methods of energy production, surveillance, or online learning) will have a key role to play."
But moral and ethical questions never yield fully to technical solutions; they also require an understanding of humanity’s social and cultural heritage.
"Science can help us to attain the life we want, but it cannot teach us what kind of life is worth wanting."
"In short, each side in the current education debate is half right."
"As human affairs become increasingly complex and morally exigent, future generations will need both scientific and humanistic learning – and they will need them more than ever."
"Fortunately, promising new models for making education more coherent and capacious are emerging."
"Yale University and the National University of Singapore have worked together to establish Yale-NUS, Singapore’s first liberal arts college."
"Led by a literary scholar and an astronomer, this new residential college aims to break down interdisciplinary boundaries and enable students to learn from one another."
"Likewise, Quest University in Canada encourages students to bring both scientific and humanistic knowledge to bear on today’s most pressing problems."
Similar efforts have been underway for years in the US.
"For example, North Carolina State University’s Benjamin Franklin Scholars program – a collaboration between the College of Engineering and the College of Humanities and Social Sciences – aims “to produce well-rounded professionals who are analytical problem-solvers, ethical decision-makers, and effective communicators.”"
"Unfortunately, such programs largely lack the visibility and influence needed to shape educational reform."
It is time to abandon the “either/or” discourse that pits science against humanities – which the British chemist and novelist C.P. Snow identified more than a half-century ago as an obstacle to human progress.
"It is time to seek out best practices that bridge this putative divide, and scale them up."
"In the important work of adapting educational institutions for the future, we must not lose sight of their core mission as articulated in the past."
"No one has expressed that mission better than Benjamin Franklin, a man of letters and a scientific innovator, who defined education as the quest for “true merit.”"
"“True merit,” Franklin wrote, consists in “an inclination joined with an ability to serve mankind, one’s country, friends, and family; which ability is…to be acquired or greatly increased by true learning; and should, indeed, be the great aim and end of all learning.”"
This is an aspiration that should be renewed for every generation.
King Coal’s Climate Challenge
"WASHINGTON, DC – Coal is emerging as a major topic of conversation at the United Nations climate-change negotiations currently taking place in Warsaw – and rightly so."
"Indeed, it is a discussion that the world needs to have."
The latest findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change conclude that we are quickly using up our carbon “budget” – the amount of carbon that we can afford to emit while still having a good chance of limiting global warming to 2º Celsius.
"According to the IPCC, keeping the global temperature increase from pre-industrial levels below this threshold – the recognized tipping point beyond which climate change is likely to get seriously out of control – requires that the world emit only about 1,000 gigatonnes of carbon (GtC)."
More than half of this amount was already emitted by 2011.
"Unless we shift away from carbon-intensive behavior, the remaining budget will run out in roughly three decades."
"When it comes to tolerable CO2 emissions, coal is the budget buster."
"Just this week, a group of 27 prominent scientists, representing all major continents, issued a joint statement that explains that burning all known fossil-fuel reserves would produce about 3,800 gigatonnes of CO2, or 1,053 GtC, with coal alone accounting for more than half."
"Simply put, if the world burns its known coal reserves using current technologies, it is likely to push global temperature rise far beyond 2ºC."
Many governments and financial institutions recognize this.
"In recent months, the World Bank, the European Investment Bank, and the United States Export-Import Bank have introduced policies that restrict financing of new coal-fired power plants unless they can capture and store their CO2 emissions."
"Five Nordic countries have joined the US Treasury in ending public financing of new coal-fired power plants overseas, and others may soon follow suit."
"And this fall, the US Environmental Protection Agency proposed emissions standards for new power plants that would rule out conventional coal power – an important step that would cut carbon pollution and drive innovation."
"Likewise, China, concerned about the serious health costs linked to burning coal, is prohibiting new coal capacity in three coastal provinces under its newly adopted action plan on air pollution."
The Chinese authorities have also introduced policies to reduce the proportion of coal in the country’s overall energy mix.
"Against this backdrop, the World Coal Association (WCA) is meeting this week, also in Warsaw – in fact, just across the river from where negotiators are trying to forge the building blocks of a global climate agreement by 2015."
"The WCA is calling for the use of “high-efficiency, low-emissions coal-combustion technologies” to lower greenhouse-gas emissions from coal-fired power plants around the world. But this approach would still consume too much of the CO2 budget."
"Even the most modern and advanced conventional coal-fired power plants emit over 15 times more CO2 per unit of electricity than renewable energy systems, and more than twice the amount of efficient gas-fired power stations."
And yet coal power is still going strong globally.
"The World Resources Institute estimates that there are close to 1,200 proposed coal-fired power projects around the world, with a total installed capacity of more than 1,400 gigawatts."
"If built, the world would commit a large share of the remaining carbon budget to high-carbon infrastructure with a lifespan of 40-50 years."
"According to the International Energy Agency, the current trend in coal use is in line with a scenario that would lead to a 6ºC temperature rise."
This is a future that would radically and irreversibly change life on earth as we know it.
This is why the OECD Secretary General has suggested that it is time for a moratorium on the construction of conventional coal-fired power plants.
Governments have far more cost-effective electricity-generation technologies at their disposal.
"Renewable energies like solar and wind are already competitive with fossil fuels in many parts of the world, and they can be scaled up rapidly."
"Moreover, most economic models do not account for the externalities related to coal and carbon pollution."
"For example, a recent report by Trucost estimates that coal-fired power generation worldwide may be responsible for around $1 trillion of damage due to climate change and air pollution."
Many coal-fired power plants would be uncompetitive if they were required to internalize these costs.
"Of course, coal continues to offer millions of people a reliable source of electricity – and the transition to low-carbon technologies will not happen overnight."
"We need to expand access to these technologies rapidly, while helping people whose livelihoods depend on the coal industry."
"While we need to be passionate about climate change, we must also be pragmatic about how we address it."
But so must the coal industry.
Participants at the WCA meeting this week should commit to additional measures that will help ensure that emissions are kept within safe limits.
A moratorium on conventional coal plants would be a smart place to start.
"That would help to show the world that the coal industry truly understands the scientific implications of current energy-use patterns, and that it is willing to assume more responsibility for combating climate change."
We need people on both sides of the Vistula River to do their part to build a fair and ambitious universal climate agreement by 2015.
Let’s roll up our sleeves together and plot a viable pathway to a safe and effective low-carbon economy.
An Economic Agenda for Italy
"MILAN – At the end of this month, Italian voters will choose their next government, from which they expect jobs and a more level economic playing field – and from which Italy’s European partners expect structural reforms and fiscal probity."
What should the new government’s economic-policy agenda be?
"To reduce public debt, which stands above 120% of GDP, while minimizing painful adjustments, Italy needs economic growth – something that has eluded policymakers in recent years."
"Indeed, Italy’s average annual GDP growth rate since joining Europe’s economic and monetary union in 1999 has been an anemic 0.5%, well below the eurozone average of nearly 1.5%."
"In the four years since the global financial crisis struck, the growth rate fell to -1.2%, compared to the eurozone average of -0.2%, and it is expected to remain negative this year."
The new government’s biggest challenge will be to implement reforms that enable Italy’s economic performance to catch up to that of its neighbors after years of bad policies and neglect.
This requires increased investment in innovation and human capital.
"From 1992 to 2011, labor productivity grew at an average annual rate of 0.9%, the lowest in the OECD."
"Since 2001, unit labor costs have been growing faster than real GDP and employment, undermining the economy’s competitiveness vis-à-vis developing countries."
"In the last decade, Italy’s share of global exports dropped from 3.9% to 2.9%."
"Persistently weak labor-productivity growth has created a situation in which unit labor costs do not fall, even if real wages remain stagnant or decline."
"Indeed, despite a 1.3% drop in real wages in 2011, unit labor costs remained unchanged."
Italy’s new leaders must address this situation by decoupling labor’s contribution to productivity growth from that of capital and total factor productivity.
"According to the OECD, lower regulatory costs and more efficient public administration (building upon measures introduced by the previous government, led by Mario Monti) could add 0.3-0.4% to average annual GDP growth by 2020."
"Likewise, labor-market reform, improved education, and enhanced human capital could contribute an additional 4% to GDP growth in the next decade."
"Moreover, Italian policymakers should strive to boost the female labor-force participation rate, which, at 49%, is one of the lowest in the OECD."
Doing so would raise per capita income by 1% annually through 2030.
"At the same time, fiscal adjustment remains essential to Italy’s short- and long-term stability."
"According to the International Monetary Fund, the budget deficit is declining, and the primary surplus (net revenues minus interest payments) is growing."
Italy’s new leadership must sustain this progress.
"Despite positive developments, the road ahead is bumpy."
Navigating it will require Italy to retain its credibility with other European Union member states and international investors.
"The new prime minister will need to persuade Germany, financial markets, and the European Council that Italy is a reliable partner."
The ability to refinance government debt and keep costs down is essential to strengthening public finances and boosting GDP growth.
"Furthermore, attracting more direct investment is crucial, given that capital inflows, while recovering, remain 30% below their pre-crisis level; with outflows exceeding inflows, Italy has become a net capital exporter."
“Selling” Italy in Europe should entail more than photo opportunities with other leaders in Brussels and the occasional road show to financial institutions in London.
"Italy’s leaders should engage actively in commercial diplomacy, using the country’s embassies and trade agencies to promote Italy globally, while working to build strong bilateral relations with other EU members, particularly southern countries like Spain."
"At the same time, the new leaders need to “sell” Europe in Italy, where Euro-skepticism is rampant."
"According to the Pew Research Global Attitudes Project, only 30% of Italians view the euro positively."
"In the country’s wealthier north, where average per capita income, at €30,000 ($40,500), approaches that of Germany, people are questioning the rationale of EU membership."
"The costs are evident, they argue, but what are the benefits?"
"Meanwhile, fears of structural decline pervade the country."
"The crisis has lasted for a long time, and people are tired."
"Unemployment has risen to a record 11.2%, with 35% of young people jobless."
"And the tax burden, which has exceeded 40% of GDP since 1990, now stands at almost 43% of GDP."
A Scandinavian level of taxes would be bearable if public services did not remain inferior to those offered in Scandinavia.
"For example, per capita health-care spending in Sweden, Denmark, and Finland exceeds $3,000, compared to only $2,300 in Italy, where households must contribute roughly 20% of total health-care spending."
"Moreover, Italy spends around 4.5% of GDP on education, while the Scandinavian countries spend more than 6% of GDP."
"As a result, Italian students’ scores in the Program for International Student Assessment are significantly lower than those of their counterparts in many other OECD countries."
"Italy’s new government will have to display leadership and vision to guide the economy toward stable growth, avert a race to the bottom, and stem growing social tension."
"Most important, economic renewal depends on the next government’s willingness and ability to address the institutional weaknesses that have made concerted action increasingly urgent."
An Energy Tax for Europe
George W. Bush’s disastrous war in Iraq has put Europe in a bind.
The United States long has been Europe’s protector.
"Now, because of a war it wanted no part of, Europe finds its security undermined."
Chaos in Iraq has empowered Iran – a much more dangerous country for Europe than Iraq ever was.
"And, with America bogged down in Iraq, Russian President Vladimir Putin has resurrected Soviet-style bullying tactics."
Would Russia otherwise have dared to threaten to re-direct its nuclear missiles at European cities?
Not only has Bush destroyed Iran’s most formidable enemy and bogged down US troops in a hopeless cause; he also has enriched energy-abundant Iran and Russia by pursuing a war that has dramatically raised energy prices.
High crude oil prices make it easier for Iran to build nuclear weapons and for Russia to use energy blackmail to threaten Europe.
But Europe can fight back.
"By imposing a stiff tax on energy consumption, Europeans would reduce both consumption of energy and its price in world markets, in turn cutting the flow of funds to Russia and Iran."
"Because crude oil is priced in US dollars, and the dollar has depreciated against the euro, European consumers have gotten off relatively easy from rising energy prices."
So an energy tax roughly equal to the euro’s 33% appreciation in recent years would be about right.
"Europeans might be forgiven for thinking that the Americans, who pumped up oil prices in the first place with their military misadventure in Iraq, should be the ones who “pump it down” with an energy tax."
"But, with a “Texas oil man” in the White House, it won’t happen."
"Perhaps after 2008, the politics in America will change in favor of an energy tax, but such a tax is needed now."
"Besides, given the strength of environmentalism in Europe, the issue is tailor-made for Europeans to take the lead."
"Moreover, Europeans do not narrowly equate national security with military spending."
They know that confiscating the checkbooks of Russia and Iran would probably make the world a lot safer than building another submarine or aircraft carrier.
"Indeed, an energy tax would not only effectively counter the argument that Europeans are “free riders” when it comes to defense; it would be tantamount to defense leadership."
"Still, with the amount of real resources transferred to their governments already high, Europeans might balk at a further increase."
"That is why the energy tax must be imposed as a tax substitution, with income or payroll taxes simultaneously reduced to keep real resource transfers to government at a constant level."
This would increase economic growth as well as strengthen national security.
Critics who worry about the cost of the energy tax have not thought about tax substitutions.
"They also do not seem to realize that an energy tax is a much cheaper way for Europe to protect itself from Iran and Russia than alternative means, such as a defense buildup."
Europe currently lacks military muscle because it made a decision a half-century ago to be protected by the US and devote the saved resources to building up its welfare state.
"This strategy – which worked well for decades – always carried the risk that at some point America’s resources might be tied up elsewhere, leaving Europe under-protected."
That risk materialized with the Iraq war.
"But Europeans are showing little taste for increased defense spending, Iraq or no Iraq."
"Even France’s new president, Nicolas Sarkozy – thought by many to be a pro-American foreign policy hawk – is backing away from his campaign promise to maintain defense spending at 2% of GDP."
"In a recent speech to the French defense industry, Sarkozy conspicuously failed to repeat the pledge, instead warning that he soon might cut France’s defense budget."
"According to a respected defense industry publication, Sarkozy changed his mind after his party’s smaller-than-anticipated victory in June’s parliamentary election."
The reason Europeans are reluctant to increase defense spending is expense.
Cutting welfare spending – where the big money is – would be painful.
"Solemn promises made over the years would have to be broken (people would not get the social services that they paid for with a lifetime of high taxes), lives would be shortened (less money for hospitals and nursing homes), and overall hardship increased."
Even economic growth will not prevent a tradeoff between defense and welfare spending for Europeans.
Fifty years of defense dependence on the US has created a powerful “peace industry” in Europe whose primary business is to fight defense spending tooth and nail.
"They will want to protect all social spending, regardless of the consequences for foreign policy."
"A counterweight to the “peace crowd” may be new migrants from Eastern Europe, for whom cuts in social services would break no promises, and for whom job availability and wage levels are more important."
"But it will take some time before the new migrants gain decisive political influence, and the problems of Iran and Russia for Europe require immediate attention."
"In short, Europeans will not allow Bush’s Iraq war to become a war on their welfare state."
"What makes the energy imposed as a tax substitution tax particularly attractive as a defense measure is that it leaves the welfare state intact while making Europe safer, greener, and richer."
Why wait?
An Epidemic of Politic
"Americans, like citizens in countries throughout the world, have come to accept that politics plays an important role in the appointment of certain kinds of public officials."
Few of us are surprised (though some may be disappointed) when a federal judgeship is awarded or a senior diplomat appointed because the candidate passes a litmus test of loyalty to some principle that is important to the President's or Prime Minister's party.
"But science, almost everyone agrees, is different, and here the United States is beginning to stand as a cautionary example to the rest of the world."
"Scientific appointments should rest on objective criteria of training, ability, and performance."
"Clearly, it is legitimate to interrogate a future Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) about his views on abortion."
But it is entirely out of place when appointees to scientific advisory committees are subjected to tests of political loyalty.
"Similarly, membership of bodies that conduct peer review of scientific proposals - a process that is fundamental to scientific progress - surely ought to be free of all barriers to entry that are unrelated to professional qualifications."
"Unfortunately, scientists in the US are running up against such barriers more and more often."
"During the past fall, the journal Science published several news stories related to the issue."
"One involved the wholesale replacement of members of the advisory committee to the National Center for Environmental Health, a part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), without consulting the center's director."
"Similar cases involved the CDC's Advisory Committee on Lead Poisoning and Prevention, the Advisory Committee on National Human Research Protections, and the Advisory Committee on Genetic Testing."
"The current epidemic of ideology, in which advisory committees are shut down and reassembled with new members, and candidates are subjected to loyalty tests, seems old hat to some observers."
"Officials at the HHS call it ""fairly standard practice."""
"Well, it isn't standard practice in America - or at least it wasn't."
"In any case, what's really worrisome is not that the Bush administration examines candidates for compatibility with its ""values."""
"The most alarming development is how deep the ideological vetting now cuts, invading areas that once were immune to this kind of manipulation."
"Indeed, perhaps the most telling case in the widening political epidemic was a membership re-shuffle of the study section at the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health that evaluates grants for studying workplace injuries."
Advisory committees might have been vulnerable to occasional stacking of this kind in the past.
"After all, they recommend the policies that politicians may or may not want to consider."
But study sections?
"In October 2002,"
"Their piece was a story in itself, but what followed was even more interesting."
It set off a volley of letters in which scientists told of similar experiences.
A nominee for the National Institutes of Health's Muscular Dystrophy Research Coordinating Committee told of being vetted by a White House staff member.
"After being asked about her views on various Bush administration policies, none of them related to the work of the committee, she was asked whether she supports the president's policy on embryonic stem cells."
"Another letter writer, a distinguished professor of psychiatry and psychology, reported receiving a call from the White House about his nomination to serve on the National Council on Drug Abuse."
"The caller declared that he must vet him to ""determine whether he held any views that might be embarrassing to the president."""
"According to the professor, a series of questions followed, with the White House official keeping a running score."
"One example: ""You're two for three; the president opposes needle exchange [for intravenous drug users] on moral grounds, regardless of the outcome."""
Then the exchange took an even more chilling turn.
"The official asked the nominee whether he had voted for Bush, and, on being informed that he had not, asked: ""Why didn't you support the president?"""
"This is the stuff of dictatorship, not democracy."
"The purpose of scientific advisory committees is to provide balanced, thoughtful advice to the policy process."
Nothing is gained - and much is lost - when a desired policy outcome is put first.
"This is why deciding which research projects to support has always been a matter for objective peer review, not politicians."
"In fact, the applicable statute for all this - the Federal Advisory Committee Act - specifically"
US Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson and the White House Personnel Office ought to set an example to the rest of the world.
They can do so very easily: by following the law.
A New Anti-Semitism
These are violent times.
"Some believe that we are experiencing a new kind of conflict: “culture wars,” such as those between Sunni and Shiite Muslims or tribal groups in Africa and Asia, or indeed Islamists and Westerners."
"However, the deeper reasons for some of these conflicts may well be more traditional."
Belonging to a particular cultural group is merely a pretext for battles between the winners and losers of globalization.
Ruthless leaders mobilize disoriented followers.
"Particularly the losers, often represented by young men with no future to look forward to, can be induced to take even suicidal action against the alleged enemy."
"Perhaps one should not be surprised that at such a time, the oldest of our ugly ­– indeed, deadly – resentments, anti-Semitism, is re-emerging from the shadows."
"Its comeback takes the classical form of attacks on individuals, like the recent killing of a young Jew in France, or of disfiguring symbolic places, like cemeteries and synagogues. But there is also a more general sense of hostility to all things Jewish."
One would have thought that anti-Semitism died forever with the Holocaust; but it did not.
"There are those who deny that the Holocaust ever took place, or that it did in its all-too-well-documented manner."
"The deniers range from second-rate historians like David Irving to apparently popular politicians like Iran’s recently elected president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad."
The evidence of what Nazi Germany did is so powerful that those who deny it can probably be dealt with even without putting them in prison and thereby drawing more attention to them than they deserve.
The more worrisome source of anti-Semitism is different and justifies speaking of a new anti-Semitism.
It has to do with Israel.
"To be sure, America is the first name in anti-Western resentment. But its second name is Israel, the only successful modern country in the Middle East, which is also highly militarized, an occupying power, and ruthless in defense of its interests."
It is difficult to exaggerate the strange sentiment in the West which one might call Palestine romanticism.
"Intellectuals like the late Edward Said gave voice to it, but it has many followers in the United States and Europe."
"Palestine romanticism glorifies the Palestinians as the victims of Israel’s rule, points to the treatment of Israeli Palestinians as at best second-class citizens, and cites the many incidents of oppression in the occupied territories, including the effects of Israel’s “security fence.”"
"Implicitly or explicitly, people take the side of the victims, contribute by sending money to them, declare even suicide bombers legitimate, and move ever further away from support for and defense of Israel."
"Of course, it is true that in theory one can oppose Israel’s policies without being anti-Semitic."
"After all, there are enough critics of Israel’s policies among Israelis."
Yet the distinction has become more and more difficult to maintain.
"Jews outside Israel feel that they have to defend – right or wrong – the country that, after all, is their ultimate hope of security."
"This makes their friends hesitate to speak up for fear of being painted into not just an anti-Israel, but also an anti-Semitic corner."
"The defensiveness of Jews and the uneasy silence of their friends mean that the stage of public debate is open for those who actually are anti-Semitic, though they confine themselves to anti-Israel language."
Anti-Semitism is disgusting in whatever form it arises.
"This is true also for other kinds of group hatred, but the Holocaust makes anti-Semitism unique, because it is an emotion complicit in the near annihilation of an entire people."
"The new anti-Semitism, however, cannot be fought successfully by education and argument in the rest of the world alone."
It is linked to Israel.
"If one belongs to a generation that regarded Israel as one of the great achievements of the twentieth century, and admired the way in which the country provided a proud home for the persecuted and downtrodden, one is particularly concerned that it may now be at risk."
A New Approach to North Korea
"SEOUL – The long-delayed meeting of North Korea’s ruling Worker’s Party is now underway, and comes at a time of severe tension between North Korea and the international community."
"It is widely expected that Kim Jong-il’s third son, Kim Jong-eun, will be appointed to a key position and be publicly announced as his father’s successor."
"There are also hints that a reshuffling of important positions within the Party will take place, allowing the presumed heir to form a new power base."
"Whatever happens, and whoever turns out to be the new leader, North Korea most likely faces an unstable future."
The cost of maintaining internal order will continue to rise as the system’s fundamental defects force the new leader to confront stark new challenges.
"Moreover, responsibility for managing that potential instability extends far beyond the leadership in Pyongyang."
"North Korea’s fragility is suggested by the fact that even such an important political event as the Worker’s Party conference, held for the first time in three decades, was abruptly postponed earlier in September."
"One cause for the delay could be a schism within the ruling elite, a group that “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il himself cannot control as effectively as before."
"Moreover, Kim’s health problems might have worsened much faster than outsiders guess, further complicating matters."
"“Enough is enough,” a mid-level North Korean government official recently uttered in a private conversation with a South Korean visitor to Pyongyang regarding Kim Jong-eun’s likely succession."
"Ordinary North Koreans, too, evidently seem to view this succession differently from that of Kim Jong-il’s inheritance of power from his father, Kim Il-sung."
"Moreover, there is no hope that any new leader, whoever it may be, will get any breathing space to establish unquestioned control, given the economy’s utter state of decay, as last year’s failed bid to reform the currency demonstrated."
"The regime is under growing pressure from those at the bottom of North Korean society, and recognizes its own inability to handle the situation."
"For example, for the first time, North Korea’s prime minister publicly apologized for a policy error – the failure of the currency redenomination."
For the dynamics of the relationship between North Korea’s people and its rulers seems to be changing fundamentally.
One troubling aspect of this change is that the new leader may feel the need to resort to brute force more frequently in order to suppress popular resistance.
"And, at a time of domestic hardship and diplomatic isolation, North Korea’s leaders, their confidence boosted by their possession of nuclear weapons, might try to distract their public through audacious, and possibly destructive, acts abroad."
The attack on the South Korean naval ship Cheonan earlier this year may be a grim sign of things to come.
"Indeed, the North Korean threat nowadays derives more from the regime’s internal weaknesses than from its aggressive external posture – the latter being the authorities’ fearful response to the former."
"Unfortunately, however, most international efforts have sought to ameliorate the symptoms rather than cure the underlying disease."
"Of course, in order to pressure North Korea’s government to give up its nuclear option, the current international economic sanctions, which target WMD-related products and luxury goods, probably should continue."
"But, at the same time, the international community should place greater emphasis on policies aimed at inducing North Korea to launch serious economic reform."
"At a time of increased tension between North Korea, South Korea, and the United States such a policy may seem impossible to undertake."
Yet a road map for a peaceful transition can be designed.
"If, say, North Korea is willing to respect international standards of economic behavior, it could be invited to join the International Monetary Fund."
Western governments also could permit charitable foundations to provide North Korean officials or students with scholarships to study abroad and learn how to run a market economy.
"Of course, any assistance to North Korea would have to be monitored closely to prevent it from being diverted for military or other political purposes."
The international community would lose nothing by trying this approach and testing the regime’s will to reform.
"In fact, following the recent currency fiasco, North Korean leaders may have become more open to economic reform than ever before."
"Such an approach is also compatible with Chinese policy, which has been to pressure North Korea to adopt its model of economic reform."
"To be sure, North Korea’s regime is not the only obstacle to international engagement."
Conservatives in both the United States and South Korea may argue that North Korea must first move toward denuclearization before any kind of economic assistance is offered.
But there is no reason why international efforts to ensure North Korea’s denuclearization must preclude policies aimed at bringing about domestic reform.
We need not assume that these goals cannot be pursued simultaneously.
"On the contrary, it may be impossible to win North Korea’s assent to denuclearization in the absence of far-reaching domestic change."
"The past two decades have shown that “politically correct” decisions do not produce the “right” results, even in the long run."
"As North Korea grooms a new leader, the world needs to groom a new policy for North Korea."
A New Asian Security Constellation
NEW DELHI – Leading members of the governments of India and South Korea recently met to begin a new “strategic partnership.”
"They are not alone in doing so, for across Asia, a new security architecture is being constructed, seemingly piecemeal."
How Asia’s geopolitical landscape will evolve over the coming decades is not easy to foresee.
"But it is apparent that an increasingly assertive China is unwittingly reinforcing America’s role in Asia, restoring US primacy as the implicit guarantor of security and stability in the region."
There are at least four possible Asian security scenarios for the years and decades ahead.
The first is the rise of a Sino-centric Asia.
China seeks a multipolar world but a unipolar Asia.
"By contrast, the US desires a unipolar world but a multipolar Asia."
"A second scenario is that the US remains Asia’s principal security anchor, with or without a third possibility: the emergence of a constellation of Asian states with common interests working together to ensure that Asia is not unipolar."
"Finally, Asia could come to be characterized by several resurgent powers, including Japan, India, Vietnam, Indonesia, and a reunified Korea."
"Of the four scenarios, the first has caused the greatest unease."
China’s neighbors are increasingly anxious about its growing power and assertiveness.
"While China’s rulers aspire to shape a Sino-centric Asia, their efforts to intimidate smaller neighbors hardly make China a credible candidate for Asian leadership."
"After all, genuine leadership cannot come from raw power, but only from other states’ consent or tacit acceptance."
"If leadership could be built on brute force, schoolyard bullies would be class presidents."
"In any event, China’s power may be vast and rapidly growing, but it lacks the ability to compel."
"In other words, China does not have the capability to rout any rival militarily, let alone enforce its will on Asia."
"That fact has, however, done little to allay fears in the region."
"With its defense spending having grown almost twice as fast as its GDP, China is now beginning to take the gloves off, confident that it has acquired the necessary muscle."
"For example, China now includes the South China Sea in its “core” national interests, on a par with Taiwan and Tibet, in order to stake a virtually exclusive claim to military operations there."
"China also has increasingly questioned India’s sovereignty over Arunachal Pradesh, the northeastern Indian state that China’s rulers call “Southern Tibet” and claim largely as their own."
"Indian defense officials have reported a rising number of Chinese military incursions across the 4,057-kilometer Himalayan border."
"As China seeks to translate its economic clout into major geopolitical advantages in Asia, a country that once boasted of “having friends everywhere” finds that its growing power may be inspiring awe, but that its actions are spurring new concerns and fears."
Which states will accept China as Asia’s leader?
"Six decades of ruthless repression has failed to win China acceptance even in Tibet and Xinjiang, as the Tibetan and Uighur revolts of 2008 and 2009 attested."
Leadership entails more than the possession of enormous economic and military power.
It demands the power of ideas that can galvanize others.
Such power also serves as the moral veneer to the assertiveness often involved in the pursuit of any particular cause or interest.
"The US and its allies won the Cold War, for example, not so much by military means as by spreading the ideas of political freedom and market capitalism to other regions."
"In the words of the strategic analyst Stanley A. Weiss, this “helped suck the lifeblood out of communism’s global appeal,” making it incapable of meeting the widespread yearning for a better and more open life."
China has shown itself adept at assertively promoting its national interests and playing classical balance-of-power geopolitics.
"But, in order to displace the US and assume the mantle of leadership in Asia, China must do more than pursue its own interests or contain potential rivals."
"Most fundamentally, what does China represent in terms of values and ideas?"
"In the absence of an answer to that question, China’s overly assertive policies have proven a diplomatic boon for the US in strengthening and expanding American security arrangements in Asia."
"South Korea has tightened its military alliance with the US, Japan has backed away from a move to get the US to move its Marine airbase out of Okinawa, and India, Vietnam, Indonesia, and the Philippines, among others, have drawn closer to the US."
"In terms of power-projection force capabilities or the range of military bases and security allies in Asia, no power or combination of powers is likely to match the US in the next quarter-century."
"But, while America’s continued central role in Asia is safe, the long-term viability of its security arrangements boils down to the credibility of its security assurances to allies and partners."
America’s readiness to stand by them when the game gets rough will determine the strength and size of its security-alliance system in Asia in the years ahead.
The third and fourth scenarios can unfold even if the US remains the principal security anchor for Asia.
"A number of Asian countries have already started building mutually beneficial security cooperation on a bilateral basis, thereby laying the groundwork for a potential web of interlocking strategic partnerships."
"A constellation of Asian states linked by strategic cooperation, in fact, has become critical to help institute power stability in the region."
A New Bargain for UN Reform
The United Nations is torn apart by internal tensions.
No sooner was the controversy over the creation of a Human Rights Council satisfactorily resolved than a new battle has erupted.
The United States is pressing for administrative reforms and threatening to cut off funding if the reforms are not forthcoming.
"The Secretary General has submitted a reasonable reform plan, but a majority of UN member states, acting together as the so-called G-77, are balking, because they regard it as another step in reducing the authority of the General Assembly relative to the Security Council."
"In particular, they object to the plan’s proposal to give increased powers and responsibilities to the Secretary General, whose selection is effectively in the hands of the Security Council’s five permanent members, which wield veto power."
"Many UN members, believing that power within the UN has been shifting from the General Assembly, resist giving up what they regard as its last vestige: control over the budget through the work of the Assembly’s Fifth Committee."
"In practice, the Fifth Committee has exercised the kind of micro-management over personnel and expenditure that ought to be exercised by the Secretary General if the UN is to operate effectively and to have a staff which is up to the challenges facing the organization."
This is the basis of America’s insistence on administrative reforms.
There is an urgent need to find a way out of this impasse.
"Failure of the current proposal would mean an effective end to all efforts to reform the UN, with disastrous consequences for people across the world who depend on the aid provided by the UN Development Program, the security provided by the UN’s numerous peacekeeping operations, or the myriad other services rendered by UN agencies."
"For example, failure of management reform would fuel demands by the US Congress to withhold America’s contributions to the UN budget – a policy that would greatly undermine America’s own interests, such as the planned expansion of the mission to stop genocide in Darfur."
The path to a satisfactory resolution is clear: give the General Assembly a greater role in the selection of the Secretary General so that members would be delegating powers to an authority of their own choosing.
This solution would not only permit the much-needed administrative reforms to be implemented; it would also bring clarity and transparency to a process that is in great need of improvement.
"After all, the UN Charter provides that “the Secretary-General shall be appointed by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council.”"
The original concept was that the two bodies would reach a consensus on a candidate.
"In practice, however, the five permanent members now agree on a candidate, and their decision is rubber-stamped first by the Security Council and then by the General Assembly."
"Real discussions about a new Secretary General are currently being conducted in secrecy among the permanent five, adding to the frustration of other UN members, including large powers that have been seeking without success to enlarge the Security Council."
"To achieve the reforms of the budget process that it wants, the US will need to lead the way in persuading the other permanent members of the Council to give the General Assembly a greater role in the process."
This might be done in several ways.
The Security Council might agree to recommend several candidates from which the General Assembly would select one.
"Alternatively, the General Assembly might propose several candidates to the Security Council, from which the Council would choose one to refer back to the Assembly for approval."
"Either way, the selection process would benefit from greater transparency."
"For example, the General Assembly should hold public hearings in which candidates are interviewed, thereby greatly enhancing the stature of the candidate who is eventually selected."
"Such proposals, if accepted, would help resolve the current dispute to everyone’s satisfaction."
"Indeed, they could make the UN stronger than it has ever been."
A New Bretton Woods?
"PRINCETON – The chaotic and costly international response to the world’s current financial disorder has prompted French President Nicolas Sarkozy, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, and German President Horst Köhler, a former head of the International Monetary Fund, to call for a new Bretton Woods Conference in order to design a new global financial system."
But such a demand depends on a clear understanding of what a new agreement might provide.
"It is easy to see the appeal of scrapping today’s global financial architecture, because there is obviously much that is broken."
"The existing institutions were looking increasingly irrelevant in normal times, and ineffective in times of crisis."
"Although the IMF delivered some gloomily accurate figures about the likely cost of the US housing fiasco, it played almost no role in addressing the current crisis."
This was the first international financial crisis since the Bretton Woods Conference of 1944 in which the Fund stood on the sidelines.
"The major international actor, instead, has been the G-7, a grouping dominated by medium-sized European states in which Asia’s dynamic emerging economies – the current source of global savings – have no representation."
"The Bretton Woods conference succeeded not because it assembled every state, or because the participants engaged in an extensive powwow."
"John Maynard Keynes, an architect of Bretton Woods, believed that the true lesson of the failures of the Depression-era 1930’s lay precisely in the character of the large and chaotic 1933 London World Economic Conference."
Keynes concluded that a really workable plan could be devised only at the insistence of “a single power or like-minded group of powers.”
"Keynes was basically right, but he should have added that it helps when one power can negotiate with one other power."
"In the past, the most effective financial diplomacy occurred bilaterally, between two powerful states that stood for different approaches to the international economy."
This was true of the preparations for the Bretton Woods meeting.
"Although there were 44 participating countries, only two really mattered, the United Kingdom and, above all, the United States."
"The agreement was shaped by Anglo-American dialogue, with occasional mediation from France and Canada."
Bilateral talks subsequently remained the key to every major success of large-scale financial diplomacy.
"In the early 1970’s, when the fixed exchange-rate regime came to an end, the IMF seemed to have outlived its function."
"Its Articles of Agreement were renegotiated by the US, which was looking for more flexibility, and France, which wanted something of the solidity and predictability of the old gold standard."
"Later in the 1970’s, European monetary relations were hopeless when France, Germany, and Britain tried to talk about them, but were straightened out when only France and Germany took part."
"In the mid-1980’s, when wild exchange-rate swings produced calls for new trade protection measures, the US and Japan found a solution that involved exchange-rate stabilization."
"So, what form should such bilateralism take today?"
"In terms of countries, the obvious new pair comprises the US, the world’s largest debtor, and China, its greatest saver."
"In terms of themes, the conference would have to solve a new type of problem: how states should deal with the large flows of capital that over the past four decades have been mediated by the private sector."
Two alternative models seemed to work until 2008.
"On one side was the American model, with a variety of regulated banks, lightly regulated investment banks, and largely unregulated hedge funds managing the capital flows."
"On the other side was the Chinese solution, with increasingly costly reserve management giving way to activist sovereign wealth funds looking for strategic participation in investments abroad."
Both approaches were flawed – and liable to produce political controversy.
"The American model failed because banks proved to be highly vulnerable to panic once it became clear that sophisticated new financial instruments had formed a haystack spiked with sharp, dangerous, and indigestible losses."
"And, inevitably, today’s big bailouts have been followed by a politically fraught discussion of which banks were rescued, and whose political interests were served."
"Already, there is a ferocious debate about the influence of Goldman Sachs on the US Treasury."
"Likewise, the very large European bailouts (totaling as much as 20% of GDP in Germany) have produced controversies about the distribution of costs."
"Meanwhile, the Chinese solution gave rise to nationalist fears that sovereign wealth funds might be abused to seize strategically vital businesses or whole sectors of an economy."
The original inspiration behind the creation of the IMF was that a largely automatic and rule-governed body would be a less politicized way of stabilizing markets and expectations.
"That remains true today: managing temporary stakes in banks in need of recapitalization, on behalf of large providers of capital (such as the Asian surplus countries), would put a neutral, depoliticized buffer between states and private-sector institutions."
"The IMF was originally conceived in 1944 in a world without major private capital flows, one in which states undertook almost all international transactions."
Extending its mission to include some private-sector rescues would recognize the preponderant role that markets now play.
"At the same time, the involvement of a rule-bound international agency would minimize the political poison associated with bank recapitalizations and currency interventions."
A New Chance for Darfur
"NEW BRUNSWICK, NEW JERSEY – As the crisis in Sudan’s Darfur region worsens and negotiaitions to end it drag on, an international consensus is emerging around a “muscular” policy based on public denunciation, severe economic sanctions, and, increasingly, threats of military force."
"But none of these steps, taken alone or together, can bring about the ends that their often well-intentioned advocates seek."
"On the contrary, they risk reproducing the havoc that such measures have unleashed in Iraq and elsewhere in recent years."
"In the United States, cautionary voices have been notably absent even among staunchly liberal newspapers like The New York Times ."
"Foreign policy advisers to the Democratic Party and neo-conservatives alike have called for “action” against Sudan – demands that have been echoed by an international group of intellectuals and celebrities ranging from Umberto Eco, Jürgen Habermas, and Harold Pinter to Bob Geldof, George Clooney, Mia Farrow, Matt Damon, Mick Jagger, and J.K. Rowling."
"Meanwhile, French troops, with the support of other European Union members – notably Austria, Belgium, Ireland, Poland, Romania, and Sweden – are now deployed for putatively humanitarian reasons in the Central African Republic and Chad, where they have already clashed with Sudanese government forces."
"The International Crisis Group, Human Rights Watch, and many other organizations support this deployment, while Save Darfur, despite describing itself as a non-political “alliance of more than 180 faith-based, advocacy, and humanitarian organizations,” has, in fact, been pivotal in setting the policy agenda."
"This agenda’s interventionism is incremental: tougher economic sanctions, demands that China exercise its influence, creation of a “no-fly zone,” and military force against the Sudanese army."
"The assumption is that only real pressure will finally force Sudan’s government to embrace the United Nations-African Union peacekeeping force, negotiate with the West, disband the feared Janjaweed militia, allow refugees from the country’s brutal civil war to return to their villages, and make peace with Southern rebels."
"But realizing these aims requires cooperation from the government in Khartoum, whereas each of the proposed measures would only heighten tensions or prove useless."
"Existing Western sanctions, for example, have merely driven the Sudanese regime into the arms of China, Indonesia, and Malaysia."
"Indeed, investment in Sudan has actually grown $2.8 billion over the last year."
Efforts to “pressure” the Chinese appear similarly futile.
"Darfur is hardly a high priority for China, which accounts for 20% of African trade, and buys 60% of Sudan’s oil."
Growing talk – both in Europe and America – about boycotting the Olympics (or the opening ceremony) has proven utterly ineffective in influencing China’s behavior in Tibet.
Would the threat of a boycott really prove more successful vis-à-vis Darfur?
"Likewise, even proponents of a no-fly zone are doubtful about its potential efficacy."
"After all, Sudan is the size of Western Europe, and Darfur is the size of France, with 158 refugee camps."
Strategic constraints would almost certainly overwhelm enforcement.
"Finally, there is the “military option,” which would merely justify fears in Sudan of Western “imperialism.”"
"Worse, given the splintering of rebel forces in the South, where an estimated 80 tribes and clans control their own militias, a military response could generate a power vacuum in Sudan and destabilize the nine countries – many of them fragile or failed states – on its borders."
"Western analysts and activists should have learned by now that and military threats produce only resistance, and that genuine diplomacy involves using carrots as well as sticks."
Yet the emerging policy consensus contains no positive incentives to resolve the Darfur crisis.
Nor is it clear whether its aim is to pressure Sudan into changing its policy or to bring about wholesale regime change.
"I have been to Sudan twice, and, as part of a delegation organized by Conscience International, I also visited the refugee camps in Nyala and El Fasher in Darfur."
"I have met with dozens of Sudanese politicians and diplomats, and I know that the regime in Khartoum is authoritarian, self-interested, and ruthless."
But it is not monolithic.
"Factions within the regime might prove supportive of new policies aimed at tempering the climate of violence in Sudan, decreasing its trade dependency on China, improving conditions for refugees, and lowering international tensions."
Such policies might include:
Normalizing diplomatic relations in exchange for removing obstacles to the deployment of UN-AU forces in Darfur.
"Replacing sanctions on Sudan with new investment opportunities and gradually forgiving its foreign debt in exchange for achievement of benchmarks tied to repatriating refugees, rebuilding villages, and demobilizing the Janjaweed ;"
"Calling on not only the government, but also the rebel forces, over which the West has some influence, to bargain in good faith;"
"Engaging China’s desire for international prestige by encouraging it to assume a public role in designing and overseeing repatriation, demobilization, and vocational programs;"
Offering aid to the Sudanese in rebuilding the tribal reconciliation councils that were destroyed during the civil war;
"Reintegrating Sudan into the international community through academic exchanges, conferences, political visits, and the like;"
"Strengthening the AU, which Western analysts have consistently underestimated with almost indescribable arrogance, in order to foster African solutions to African problems."
The emerging policy consensus toward Sudan is predicated on an approach that has already undermined respect for Western values throughout the non-Western world.
Its interventionist measures won’t work.
"They are unrealistic and, ultimately, counterproductive."
There is no time to lose in trying something new.
A New Dawn for Chinese Journalism?
A remarkable incident has emboldened Chinese journalists.
"Earlier this year, the government suspended publication of the newspaper Bing Dian Weekly , provoking unprecedented open protest, which received extensive media coverage worldwide."
"Even more surprisingly, the government, under the pressure of public opinion, has allowed Bing Dian to resume publication."
"The editor-in-chief and deputy editor-in-chief were sacked, but the open questioning of the legitimacy of the government’s authority to regulate journalism is bound to have a profound impact."
"Foreign observers are prone to associate the Bing Dian incident with other recent crackdowns on China’s mass media, and to conclude that Chinese journalism freedom is hopeless under the present autocratic regulation."
"Undeniably, there has been no significant change in the government’s system of journalism’s regulation since China adopted its “open door” policy almost 30 years ago."
"On the contrary, it has become more rigorous and covert."
But I still have faith that subtle changes are occurring.
A prerequisite of effective control of the media is that the controlled accept the controller’s ideology.
"After 1949, the Communist Party cultivated a stable of “theoretical experts” and other ideological servants to write lengthy articles propagating “Marxism and Mao Zedong Thought.”"
"But nowadays, such writers are hard to find, and their work is received by readers with mockery and sarcasm."
"In fact, the Central Propaganda Department’s ideological control can be maintained only through internal notices and telephone calls, which are widely scorned."
"More importantly, even the regulators themselves have ceased to believe in obsolete and rigid doctrines."
I recently met an official working for a provincial Department of Propaganda and was impressed by his bold and straightforward comments on current affairs.
"In private conversation, one might even take him for a liberal – one of a new breed of young and well-educated propaganda officials with an increasingly higher threshold of political sensitivity."
"For their part, producers of news have long since ceased to believe that news is propaganda."
I started my career with
"Indeed, Western works are taught as “models for writing” to journalism students in China’s universities."
"This is a crucial change, and it is the fundamental reason for an increasing number of genuine news items and commentaries in China’s media today."
Market pressure has also been important in pushing Chinese media to embrace change.
"Contrary to foreign perceptions, only a handful of Chinese media – for example,"
"To be sure, political information remains rigorously controlled, which puts a premium on “harmless” recreational, entertainment, and sports information – the reporting of which is basically free."
"This has resulted, in the short run, in an embrace of low journalistic standards."
But many metropolitan newspapers that once thrived on infotainment have seen their circulation fall in recent years.
"Sooner or later, readers will start to buy newspapers that can truly inform them and give voice to their opinions."
"In fact, it is these tabloids, responding to market pressure, that have started to take on responsibility as public watchdogs."
"On many occasions in recent years, they have been the first to break sensitive news."
"As a result, mainstream media are being marginalized, and the previously marginalized media are becoming mainstream."
"Thus, even without any change in the current system of regulation, extensive coverage of disasters, judicial abuses, and citizens’ pursuit of their statutory rights, along with the questioning of policies from public perspectives, is now common."
"For example, reporting by the"
"Such progress is slow and full of frustrations, for it reflects the incremental evolution of the system."
"But it is nonetheless real progress, indicating the growing influence of the Chinese media and pointing to China’s becoming a country of “free expression”."
"According to an old Chinese saying, “a just cause enjoys abundant support, while an unjust cause finds scant support.”"
A “just cause” resides in people’s hearts.
"Without the hearts of news producers – or, increasingly, of censors – the seemingly formidable edifice of journalistic regulation will, sooner or later, collapse like the Berlin Wall."
A New Deal for Fragile State
"PARIS – Today, roughly one-quarter of the world’s population lives in conflict-affected and fragile states."
"Despite vast sums of money spent aiding such states over the last 50 years, armed conflict and violence continue to blight the lives of millions of people around the world."
International and national partners must radically change the way they engage such states.
I experienced firsthand the need for a new approach in 2004 in Sri Lanka.
"Within the first two months of the devastating tsunami that struck that December, close to 50 heads of state and foreign ministers visited the island."
"Each came with their own programs, their own civil-society organizations, and their own television crews."
Few came with any deep understanding of the dynamics of the political conflict between militant Tamils and the Sri Lankan state.
"Big mistakes were made, fueling further violence."
"Our major challenge today is to move away from the model of partnership according to which priorities, policies, and funding needs are determined in donor capitals and development partners’ headquarters."
Conflict-affected states need to be able to determine their own destinies.
"We should establish models of post-conflict transition like the one advocated by the g7+, a group of eighteen fragile states."
"The model is simple: Countries assess their own situation, using tools that they develop and that are appropriate to the context, in order to formulate a vision and a plan to consolidate peace and achieve prosperity."
"This may sound like pie in the sky, but we have already tasted it in Africa, where Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity 2013-2017 and the Liberia Vision 2030 exemplify the potential of such programs."
"Progress on meeting national priorities such as peace consolidation, expanding access to justice, or increasing security is monitored locally."
"Using local systems and capacities, it turns out, can strengthen them."
"The “New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,” which builds on a series of international commitments regarding aid and development, and was endorsed at the at the Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, South Korea in 2011, proposes just such a model."
It enshrines what matters most in building peaceful states and societies: commitments – the Peace- and State-building Goals – to improve how national and international partners engage in conflict-affected and fragile contexts.
The New Deal recognizes what the history of peace-building teaches us: national leadership and ownership of agendas are key to achieving visible and sustainable results.
"As Kosti Manibe Ngai, South Sudan’s finance minister, has put it, “Nothing about us without us.”"
"In many conversations with South Sudan’s president, Salva Kiir, we have discussed setting out a short list of clear priorities for the new state."
But such goals are meaningful only if a fragile state’s partners are ready to accept the lead from a capital like Juba rather than from their own headquarters.
"More than 40 countries and institutions have endorsed the New Deal way of working, committing themselves to building better partnerships – and to investing the required resources and political capital."
This is why the New Deal model is innovative; it creates political support around issues that need to be addressed if countries are to make the transition from conflict and fragility to peace and stability.
"Supporting inclusive political dialogue and ensuring that conflict is resolved through peaceful means are the highest priorities, as are security, access to justice, and a dynamic private sector that generates sufficient job opportunities."
"Moreover, many fragile states are rich in natural resources, and must establish transparent resource management – aimed at curbing corruption and controlling illicit flows of money and goods – in order to raise the revenues needed to deliver services."
A focus on these processes would ensure that fragile states take the lead and the responsibility.
"As partners, we must accept this national leadership."
"After Haiti’s catastrophic earthquake in 2010, the country was dubbed “the republic of NGOs.”"
"Unable to create conditions in which Haitians themselves could take the lead in rebuilding their country, Haiti’s external partners undermined the establishment of a functioning internal governance system."
"So, how can we translate our commitments and priorities into better lives for people who are affected by conflict and fragility?"
OECD countries need to lead by example and meet the commitments that they have made.
"Our partners, through groupings like the g7+, must continue to demand the changes in policies and practices that have been promised."
We also must plan to change for the long term.
"As the Millennium Development Goals’ 2015 end date approaches, promotion of peace, security, and non-violent conflict resolution continues to be vitally important, and must be fully integrated into any future development agenda."
"Recently, the members of the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, the high-level political forum that produced the New Deal, met in Washington, DC, to assess our progress in changing how we work and in implementing the New Deal commitments."
"They agreed to the Washington Communiqué, which urges development partners, g7+ countries, and civil-society organizations to intensify their efforts to use the New Deal to deliver concrete results on the ground, and calls for a post-2015 development agenda that recognizes the universal importance of peace- and state-building."
"Ultimately, our progress depends on the resolve of everyone to transform the lives of the 1.5 billion people whose lives are marred by violence, conflict, and insecurity."
A New Deal for Poor Farmer
"NEW YORK – Many poor, food-importing countries around the world have become desperate in recent months, as global prices of rice, wheat, and maize have doubled."
"Hundreds of millions of poor people, who already spend a large share of their daily budget on food, are being pushed to the edge. Food riots are mounting."
"But many poor countries can grow more food themselves, because their farmers are producing far below what is technologically possible."
"In some cases, with appropriate government action, they could double or even triple food production in just a few years."
The idea is basic and well known.
Traditional farming uses few inputs and gets poor yields.
"Poor peasants use their own seeds from the preceding season, lack fertilizer, depend on rain rather than irrigation, and have little if any mechanization beyond a traditional hoe."
"Their farms are small, perhaps one hectare (2.5 acres) or less."
"Under traditional agricultural conditions, the yields of grain – rice, wheat, maize, sorghum, or millet – are usually around one ton per hectare, for one planting season per year."
"For a farm family of five or six living on one hectare, this means extreme poverty, and for their country, it means reliance on expensive food imports, including food aid."
The solution is to increase grain yields to at least two tons – and in some places to three or more tons – per hectare.
"If water can be managed through irrigation, this could be combined with multi-cropping (multiple harvests per year) to produce a crop during the dry season."
"Higher and more frequent yields mean less poverty in farm families, and lower food prices for cities."
"The key to increasing yields is to ensure that even the poorest farmers have access to improved seed varieties (usually “hybrid” seeds created by scientific selection of seed varieties), chemical fertilizers, organic matter to replenish soil nutrients, and, where possible, small-scale irrigation methods, such as a pump to lift water from a nearby well."
"There is nothing magic about this combination of high-yield seeds, fertilizer, and small-scale irrigation."
It is the key to the worldwide increase in food production since the 1960’s.
The problem is that these improved inputs have bypassed the poorest farmers and the poorest countries.
"When peasants lack their own saving accounts and collateral, they are unable to borrow from banks to buy seeds, fertilizer, and irrigation."
"As a result, they grow food the traditional way, often earning little or nothing from their harvest, because it’s not even enough to keep their families alive."
History has shown that government action is required to help the poorest farmers escape the low-yield poverty trap.
"If farmers can be helped to obtain simple technologies, income can rise, and they can accumulate bank balances and collateral."
"With a bit of temporary help, perhaps lasting around five years, farmers can build up enough wealth to obtain inputs on a market basis, either through direct purchases from savings or through bank loans."
"Around the world, government-run agricultural banks in poor countries once not only financed inputs, but also provided agricultural advice and spread new seed technologies."
"Of course, there were abuses, such as the allocation of public credits to richer farmers rather than to needy ones, or the prolonged subsidization of inputs even after farmers became creditworthy."
"And in many cases, government agricultural banks went bankrupt."
"Still, the financing of inputs played a huge and positive role in helping the poorest farmers to escape poverty and dependency on food aid."
"During the debt crisis of the 1980’s and 1990’s, the International Monetary Fund and World Bank forced dozens of poor food-importing countries to dismantle these state systems."
"Poor farmers were told to fend for themselves, to let “market forces” provide for inputs."
This was a profound mistake: there were no such market forces.
Poor farmers lost access to fertilizers and improved seed varieties.
"They could not obtain bank financing. To its credit, the World Bank recognized this mistake in a scathing internal evaluation of its long-standing agricultural policies last year."
"The time has come to reestablish public financing systems that enable small farmers in the poorest countries, notably those farming on two hectares or less, to gain access to needed inputs of high-yield seeds, fertilizer, and small-scale irrigation."
"Malawi has done this for the past three seasons, and has doubled its food production as a result."
Other low-income countries should follow suit.
"Importantly, the World Bank, under its new president, Robert Zoellick, has now stepped forward to help finance this new approach."
"If the Bank provides grants to poor countries to help small peasant farmers gain access to improved inputs, then it will be possible for those countries to increase their food production in a short period of time."
"Donor governments, including the oil-rich countries of the Middle East, should help finance the World Bank’s new efforts."
"The world should set as a practical goal of doubling grain yields in low-income Africa and similar regions (such as Haiti) during the next five years. That’s achievable if the World Bank, donor governments, and poor countries direct their attention to the urgent needs of the world’s poorest farmers."
A New Deal for the New World
As former members of our countries' congresses we believe that it is time to create a North American Parliamentary Union (NAPU) to address the growing number of big issues that North America's national governments have pushed to the sidelines.
"Both past and present have been burdened by the ad hoc nature of relations among the United States, Mexico, and Canada."
"A fairer, more prosperous future for all three countries demands that we take a bold step forward."
"Despite US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld's snide reference to ``Old Europe,'' North Americans can learn much from the European Union and European Parliament."
"In the 1950's, most of Europe considered the idea of a Union with a single Parliament a pipe dream."
"Today the EU elects its Parliament, shares a single currency, and controls a budget that emphasizes raising living standards within the less developed member countries."
"Within the near future, the EU is likely to be 450 million people strong."
"The combined population of the US, Mexico, and Canada is about 410 million people. Yet North America has failed to match Europe in building the political structures necessary to focus the hemisphere on the problems of immigration, cross border security, labor rights, and environmental degradation; or in facilitating a more united approach to strong economic competition from Europe and Asia."
"On the contrary, in the aftermath of the Iraq War, relations between the US and its neighbors, Canada and Mexico, are at their lowest level in years."
"Clearly, efforts to deepen North American political and economic integration will be an uphill battle."
"In the near future, the US government will be focused on homeland security, Iraq, the slumping domestic economy, and the run-up to the 2004 presidential election."
"Canada's government has been more willing to approach North American issues on a bilateral basis than in a tri-national context; furthermore, Canadians are preoccupied with the consequences and aftermath of SARS and mad cow disease, as well as anticipating a new government next year."
"Mexico's President Vincente Fox will govern through 2006. But his vision of a North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA) encompassing elements of social and political fusion with his North American counterparts was sidetracked by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and by his political rivals' recent successes at the polls."
"Notwithstanding this, most Canadians and Mexicans believe that cooperation in North America will proceed regardless of who is in office in Ottawa, Washington, or Mexico City."
"Not only are Canada and Mexico the US's first and second largest trading partners, but the three countries maintain a myriad of relationships--in business, tourism, and culture--that do not pass through their embassies or governments."
Good feelings abound.
"US citizens register high approval ratings in Canada and Mexico: 90% and 70%, respectively."
"In proposing the creation of NAPU, we envision a specific plan to create a larger market by fostering an alliance between the three economies."
"In just a single decade, the EU managed to bring poorer, peripheral member states--Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Ireland--from 50% to 90% of the EU average in per capita income, creating a bigger market for companies from wealthier northern countries, and stemming migration from poorer southern economies."
The EU invested upwards of $35 billion a year to assure the success of their Common Market integration.
"North America has largely ignored the significance of ``common,'' preferring to focus on ``market.'' This blinded all three countries to the centrality of community."
We have failed to understand that a North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) that achieves its full potential cannot be accomplished on the cheap.
A regional political structure will maintain the focus on vital but difficult issues such as immigration.
NAFTA was conceived under the assumption that expanded trade would trickle down benefits to all in the three countries.
"Regretfully, this corporate-driven NAFTA exacerbated the disparities and asymmetries between Mexico and its two richer northern neighbors."
"Moreover, throughout NAFTA's lifetime income and wealth have been further concentrated within the elite sectors of US and Canadian society."
Immigration illustrates the cost of integration without convergence.
"Demand for low-cost Mexican labor by US employers and the 10-1 wage gap between the two countries pushes 350,000 Mexicans to risk their lives every year for better paid jobs north of the border."
"Without Mexican manpower, much of the work in the US simply would not get done."
"The issue must be addressed, not ignored and criminalized."
NAPU would be the ideal forum in which to address this concern.
"Everywhere nowadays, key decisions are made by a self-selected group of elites, often in non-transparent circumstances."
"NAPU would allow for wider, more consistent participation in the consideration of issues now ignored in all three countries."
Inter-American issues can no longer be left subject to the whims and convenience of individual leaders.
"The people of the US, Canada, and Mexico deserve better."
A New Democratic Agenda for Russia
"MOSCOW – When Russian President Dmitri Medvedev delivered his annual address to the Federal Assembly I was struck by the fact that his speech seemed to be meant for an advanced, prosperous country, not the real Russia of today."
Russia will hold a presidential election in 2012.
"What happens in 2011 will, in my opinion, be even more important than the election itself."
"Indeed, the evolution of Russian society could transform Russian politics, despite those domestic opponents who deny change or those who unqualifiedly classify Russia as “incorrigibly authoritarian.”"
"But, in order for that to happen, a new agenda for Russia must be developed this year."
"A decade ago, defense of Russia’s territorial integrity and restoration of governability topped the list of priorities."
"People supported a president, Vladimir Putin, who was devoted to this “stabilization” agenda."
"We may debate the means by which it was pursued, and how successfully, but Russia’s “existential” challenges were largely overcome."
"But progress on stabilization only highlighted Russia’s unresolved problems, which the global financial crisis exacerbated, but did not cause."
"After all, Russia’s resource-based, de-industrializing, expenditure-driven economy is the result of purely domestic choices."
"Nor was it the crisis that gave rise to corruption, which affects officialdom at all levels, or that caused Russia to lose its democratic dynamic."
"We Russians rode along on oil and gas, forgetting that these resources will not last forever."
"But, even with favorable world market conditions, we did not manage to solve the problem of poverty, in which millions of Russians still live."
I am convinced that Russia’s troubles all come down to politics.
"We need a democratic, competitive environment, initiative at all levels, an active civil society, and real public control."
Only under such conditions will difficult problems lend themselves to solution.
"But, starting in 2005-2006, the authorities implemented measures that made responsiveness to acute problems practically impossible."
"The decisions to appoint, rather than elect, regional governors, to introduce party-list voting, to raise the electoral threshold for parties to enter the Duma, and to repeal the minimum-turnout requirement – all accompanied by rampant manipulation of elections and the mass media – created a political system closed to feedback from society."
"Not surprisingly, the political elite became self-absorbed and served only its own narrow interests."
"This summer, with wildfires raging outside Moscow, the elite’s isolation took on a menacing nature."
"But something else happened: society became more demanding, recognizing its own interests and knowing how to express them."
"Although the traditions of self-organization in Russian society are neither deep nor strong, real movement in this direction became visible for all to see."
"Activists from public movements, journalists, ecologists, businessmen, and ordinary people who had suffered the tyranny and corruption of public officials began to join in."
"The authorities have recognized this, at least to some degree."
Medvedev's decision to suspend construction of a highway through the Khimki forest near Moscow in the face of widespread civic protest was important.
"For many months, Moscow and federal authorities ignored the highway’s opponents, so Medvedev’s decision was a signal: contempt for the people is inadmissible."
"Yet right after that, the bureaucracy tried to turn the public hearings – called to give people and civil institutions a voice in solving such problems – into an empty formality."
So the struggle between democratic and anti-democratic tendencies is becoming acute.
"If the anti-democratic tendencies win out, all that we have accomplished in previous years will be jeopardized – including stability itself."
"This threat evidently motivated Medvedev to speak out in November: “It is no secret,” Medvedev wrote in his blog, “that, as of a certain period, symptoms of stagnation have begun to appear in our political life, and the threat of turning stability into a factor of stagnation has appeared.”"
The president’s statement was unexpected.
"Medvedev’s assessment attested to his understanding that Russia’s problems are rooted in its politics – in the degradation of the ruling party, in the absence of a real opposition, and in the lack of respect for the rights of political minorities."
I welcome Medvedev’s emphasis on social concerns and his anti-bureaucratic rhetoric.
"But his statements are only a first step toward formulating a new Russian agenda, the first point of which must be a renewal and acceleration of movement toward real and effective democracy."
"It is vital that Russians believe that Medvedev’s words reflect his priorities, and that he is prepared to fight for them."
"Among these priorities, one of the most important is education."
"We have approached the point when the constitutional requirement of universal, free education may become a fiction."
"People are asking: How is it that, after World War II, the state had enough money to provide free education, whereas today’s Russian state does not?"
"Society also demands effective mechanisms for combating corruption, which is turning into a serious political problem, precisely because it has widened the gap between the people and the authorities."
"Indeed, today’s elite cannot or will not solve the problem."
"Only a serious presidential initiative, supported by civil society and brave new political forces, can do the job."
The new agenda must also include a strong economic component.
Patching up holes in the budget and individual initiatives are not enough to ensure economic renewal.
"Russia needs a breakthrough toward an up-to-date, knowledge-based, and ecologically sustainable economy."
"Here, I see a direct connection with the problem of education."
"I am convinced that Medvedev must become the leader in the process of formulating the new Russian agenda, and he must act in the coming year."
Society will support him.
A New Era for Islamic Science?
"For a few hundred years, when science and mathematics were enjoying a period of great invention, one region of the world stood out."
"Masters of these disciplines were revered there, medicine advanced quickly, and the average person was curious about how nature worked."
"Not surprisingly, this region was globally respected."
"In the other half of the known planet, scientists were punished, even killed."
"Mathematics was outlawed as irreligious and alien, and was later made subservient to religion."
The standard of living was low.
"The prosperous region was the Islamic Middle East, while an ignorant Europe remained poor."
"Both regions were religiously governed (historians differ about the role and natures of the religions in this context), but science flourished only in one of them."
"Now, of course the roles of the Islamic Middle East and the West are reversed."
"Since World War II, the United States has been the world’s undisputed leader in science."
"Throughout this period, the brightest students were drawn away from their native lands, attracted by superior research universities and opportunities."
"Until recently, more than half of all mathematics, science, and engineering graduate students in the US were foreign-born."
"Many of these talents stayed after graduation, and both industry and government took advantage of this."
"Meanwhile, Islamic cultures entered a historical phase in which science was equated with Western influence and eschewed."
"Even in countries where oil revenues could fuel a significant amount of research, Arab rulers did not encourage such investment, with the result that their societies have not prospered as much as they might have."
"Recently, a desire for greater political respect has spurred Islamic nations to invest in technology, which is most visible in Pakistani and Iranian nuclear ambitions."
"But while such weapons carry political weight, the science behind them is mundane and old."
"More meaningful is the respect that comes from incubating insights, rather than the products of past discoveries."
Imagine the influence that would be generated by a Pakistani institute that was the world leader in cancer research.
Would the political rhetoric shift if researchers in Oman discovered a key to suppressing AIDS?
This is one unclaimed opportunity.
"But another exists, and not just for Islamic societies."
The US has made profound missteps recently.
"“Matters of faith” have been substituted for science across government, from the president down."
Top researchers have had their reports changed by political operatives when the facts contradicted official belief.
"Encouraged by a religiously influenced administration, school systems are shifting their focus from science to “values.”"
"Since the terrorist attacks of September 2001, entry visas are fewer and more difficult to obtain, stanching the flow of young talent into US universities."
"Major scientific organizations have protested, without result."
"At the same time, tax laws have been revised to make investors wealthier in the near term, discouraging long-term investment in research."
"Half a trillion dollars was committed to the war in Iraq, an amount roughly equal to the sponsorship of all basic research for the last thousand years."
"Even if the US avoids a fundamentalist dark age, it clearly risks losing its global research dominance."
Japan recognized the link between political clout and science in the 1980’s.
"Japan’s chief industrialist, Akio Morita, the chairman of Sony, and the right-wing politician Shintaro Ishihara gave a series of speeches that were collected and published in 1986 as a book called"
Building a knowledge-based economy using oil wealth is clearly possible.
"For example, Texas, like most southern US states, was once economically poor and declining."
"Although it had oil revenue, the flow of dollars into an economy, by itself, does not boost prosperity as much as one might think."
So Texas decided to devote its oil money to an educational endowment.
"Today, that endowment is roughly equal to that of Harvard University and spread over 15 universities."
"The effect has been staggering: aerospace manufacturing has almost disappeared from California, but is booming in Texas."
"Telecom research centers and consortia have flocked to Texas, even from the Canadian telecommunications giant Nortel."
"Although manufacturing in the US is in crisis, Texas has one of the strongest manufacturing economies in the world."
There is no reason that the same outcome could not be achieved in the Middle East.
"First, however, the Islamic world must rediscover and embrace its proud heritage."
­A New European Growth Agenda
BRUSSELS – Austerity alone cannot solve Europe's economic and financial crisis.
Growth and jobs need to be promoted with equal zeal.
European Union leaders now recognize this: kick-starting growth in 2012 was high on the agenda at the European Council’s meeting on January 30.
But the big question remains: How?
The need for immediate action is clear.
The eurozone’s economy contracted in the last three months of 2011; even Germany’s shrank.
The new year is looking grim.
France is flat-lining (as is Britain).
Italy and Spain have sunk into deep recession.
Greece is in its fifth year of a slump.
"And eurozone unemployment is at record highs, with nearly one in two young people jobless in Spain and Greece."
"The economic headwinds are formidable: fiscal austerity, high interest rates outside AAA-rated countries, credit cutting by banks, deleveraging households, weak private-sector investment, and declining exports as the global slowdown undermines demand."
"Until growth resumes, any tentative financial stabilization will be extremely fragile."
"Recession will hit banks’ and governments’ already-weak balance sheets, increasing pressure for faster deleveraging."
"But, while gradual adjustment is essential, faster and deeper cuts are largely self-defeating: big reductions in private credit and government spending will cause a sharper slowdown – and thus a vicious downward spiral."
A big new push for growth is therefore vital.
"So far, the growth agenda has consisted largely of structural reforms, which are essential for boosting future productivity and flexibility."
The crisis does provide a political opportunity for bold moves on this front in many countries; but structural reforms generally will not generate growth and jobs immediately (one exception is permitting shops to open longer).
"On the contrary, a shakeout of less productive jobs, for example, would at first raise unemployment, increase government outlays, and reduce private spending."
"And, because demand is depressed, credit is in short supply, and barriers to enterprise are often high, it will take longer than usual for businesses to create more productive jobs."
"In short, structural reforms alone cannot be relied upon to stimulate growth in 2012."
"Instead, the immediate focus needs to be on boosting investment and exports in economies with a current-account deficit – such as France, Italy, and Spain (and the United Kingdom) – and stimulating consumption in surplus countries such as Germany and the Netherlands."
"The European Central Bank has acted decisively to prop up European banks; now it needs to support the real economy, too."
"While official interest rates are only 1%, solvent sovereigns such as Spain pay more than 5% to borrow for ten years, while creditworthy businesses in Italy can borrow only at punitive rates, if at all."
"So the ECB should do more to unblock the transmission mechanism for monetary policy; the European Banking Authority should discourage excessive deleveraging by insisting that banks raise specific capital amounts rather than hit a uniform 9% ratio; and, where necessary, national governments should provide guarantees for bank lending to small and medium-size businesses."
"While improving access to finance is vital, governments also need to do more to boost investment."
"They should prioritize measures to make it easier to start a business, lift barriers to venture capital, and introduce temporary 100% capital allowances to encourage businesses to bring forward investment."
"At the EU level, the (callable) capital of the European Investment Bank should be greatly increased, as European Commission President José Manuel Barroso suggested in his State of the Union speech last September, so that the EIB can finance a big wave of pan-European investment, notably in infrastructure."
Boosting exports is also essential.
"Deficit countries need to become more competitive, increasing productivity while cutting costs."
"A more competitive currency would be welcome: just as the sterling’s collapse since 2008 has lifted UK exports, a weaker euro would help Mediterranean economies regain competitiveness for price-sensitive exports."
A fiscal devaluation – slashing payroll taxes and replacing the revenues with a higher VAT – would also help.
"Surplus countries, too, must do their part, which is in their own interest."
"Just as China needs to allow the renminbi to rise, so Germany – whose current-account surplus exceeds China's both as a share of GDP and in absolute terms – needs a higher real exchange rate."
"That means that Germans need to earn higher wages, commensurate with their increased productivity, so that they can afford more Greek and Spanish holidays."
"If businesses will not oblige, an income-tax cut would do the trick."
That brings us to fiscal policy.
Governments that cannot borrow cheaply (or at all) from markets have no option but to tighten their belts.
But they should pursue smart consolidation rather than unthinking austerity.
"So they should maintain investment in skills and infrastructure, while cutting subsidies and transfer payments."
"They should also legislate now for future reforms, notably to encourage people to work longer."
"Last but not least, governments that can borrow at unprecedentedly low rates – 0% in real terms over 10 years in the case of Germany – must play their role in supporting demand."
Would it be really be so difficult to see VAT coming down ahead of the German election next year?
A New Holy Alliance?
"LONDON &#45;&#45; The recent meeting in the Vatican of the “Custodian of The Holy Places,” King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, and Pope Benedict XVI was a seminal event, particularly as it comes at a time when radical Muslims are decrying the role of “crusaders” in Middle East politics."
"It was also the clearest sign yet of a rising “Holy Alliance” among the world’s conservative leaders. For the key audience for this meeting of Muslim king and Roman Catholic Pontiff was not their followers, but another conservative leader, President George W. Bush."
The first “Holy Alliance” was a creation of Austria’s Prince Metternich following the Napoleonic wars.
It was an attempt to preserve the peace (and the security of the relatively weak Austrian Empire) through a coalition of victors upholding shared values.
Metternich’s “Holy Alliance” was the one original political idea to emerge from Napoleon’s defeat.
Behind its exalted name lay an innovation of great diplomatic significance: the introduction of an element of calculated moral restraint into international relations.
"The vested interests that the Alliance members – Austria, Prussia, and Russia – had in the survival of their domestic institutions led each to seek to avoid conflicts that, in the past, they would have pursued as a matter of course."
"Metternich’s system worked through much of the nineteenth century, because it protected a genuine balance of power between countries that shared common values. But what “common values” do King, Pope, and American President share?"
That such a meeting took place is a sign that both Pope and King believed that there was something to achieve.
"Indeed, Abdullah, who believes himself to be the paramount leader of the Muslim world, is the first Saudi king to initiate a meeting with a leader of the Christian faith."
"The two men met, seemingly as equals, not to express the common values of conservatism, but to confirm and promote their authority to uphold traditional values."
"Both agreed that reform must be slow, cautious and that it must never undermine established institutions, especially religion and the patriarchal family."
Abdullah sought the meeting because he believes that the world since 2001 has divided the fraternity of conservatives.
"Until then, he and Bush shared a common worldview, emphasizing the importance of religion, the traditional family (as both countries understood it), social discipline, and the state’s role in supporting these institutions."
"But Bush, following the terrorist attacks of 2001, turned his back on conservatism. He sought to radically reinvent the Middle East, not only by overthrowing the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq, but also through his strident calls for democratization."
"American radicalism, however, resulted in increasing tensions between religious communities in the Middle East, and the rise of radical Iran with its bid for regional hegemony."
"Since 2001, Christian minorities have been targeted throughout the region, including even Lebanon’s Maronite Christian community. And in Iraq, Sunni Muslims feel under siege from the country’s majority and now ruling Shia."
Here is where the Holy Alliance concept of moral restraint comes in.
"Abdullah, perhaps earlier than most others, understood that some code of restraint was needed if the entire region was not to descend into a war of all against all."
"Moreover, Abdullah understands that his wobbly regime will only be able to withstand the radical gales that are now blowing if it can forge the type of stability-seeking alliance that Metternich built."
"The King, like Metternich and the Austrian Kaisers, understands de Tocqueville’s dictum that the most dangerous moment for a regime is when it starts to reform."
"Having begun, ever so carefully, to politically open his country, the King knows that he needs regional peace and a lowering of Islamic holy rage."
The problem is that Abdullah cannot rely on his domestic conservative allies to give him the time that the Kingdom needs.
"The Wahhabi religious establishment, the Saudi state’s hidden co-rulers, could very well obstruct Abdullah’s attempts at regional religious reconciliation."
Members of the religious police remain adamant that the country’s Christian guests must continue to live according to strict Wahhabi rules of behavior.
"While the Wahhabis could yet be bribed again with oil money, the sect’s power-hungry judges eagerly await the next beheading, stoning, or lashing in Riyadh’s public square."
"For conservative rulers usually fall when they fail to grasp their own vulnerability, especially when the revolutionary challenge is cloaked in conservative garb. After all, few political systems can defend against those, like Saudi Arabia’s Islamic radicals, who claim that they can preserve the system and its religious values more effectively than the current rulers."
"Only an alliance of conservative leaders and powers (including a retreat by America from diplomatic radicalism), Abdullah believes, can restore some stability to the Middle East."
A Glimmer of Hope in Iran
BERLIN – No one could have reckoned with Hassan Rowhani’s victory in Iran’s presidential election.
"Even Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei was probably more than a little surprised by Rowhani’s first-round victory, following a campaign that began with eight candidates."
"As a result, the negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program, as well as the civil war in Syria, may well take on a new dynamic."
But that is how it is in the Middle East: you never know what lies around the corner.
"This year marks the tenth anniversary of the launch, at the foreign-minister level, of negotiations between Iran and the European triumvirate of Germany, France, and the United Kingdom on Iran’s nuclear program."
"I was there, representing Germany; so was Rowhani, who led the Iranian delegation."
The talks have continued until today – in an expanded format that includes Germany and the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (the P5+1) – without any tangible results.
"Now Rowhani returns to the risky business of Iran’s nuclear program, though this time as President."
What can we – and he – expect?
"Based on my personal experience, Rowhani is a polite and open character."
"Unlike outgoing President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, he surrounds himself with very skillful and experienced diplomats."
But there should be no doubt that he is a man of the regime – a realist and moderate member of the Islamic Republic’s political elite – not a representative of the opposition.
"And, of course, he backs Iran’s nuclear program."
"If Rowhani wants to succeed in office, he will have to keep his promise to improve Iranians’ living conditions without endangering the Islamic Republic in the process."
"That will not be easy; in fact, it could amount to trying to square a circle."
The economic improvement that voters demanded in electing Rowhani can almost certainly be achieved only if Western and international sanctions are lifted.
But an end to international sanctions presupposes a breakthrough in the nuclear negotiations.
It may also presuppose at least a temporary settlement of the main regional conflicts.
The Middle East has changed dramatically in the last ten years.
"America has reduced its involvement, having withdrawn its troops from Iraq and winding down its engagement in Afghanistan by next year."
"At the same time, we are witnessing the dissolution of the old Middle East created by France and Britain after World War I, when Europe’s two great colonial powers created territorial mandates in Palestine, Syria (including present-day Lebanon), Transjordan, and Iraq."
"A new regional order is not yet discernible, which points to a future fraught with risk and possible chaos."
"As Iran seeks to assert its influence and interests, as well as those of its Shia allies, its dispute with the Security Council over its nuclear program has become closely tied to its regional ambitions."
"After all, the prospect of a nuclear-armed Iran would most likely exacerbate violent conflict and a nuclear arms race in the region."
"As a result, both issues may well have to be addressed successfully prior to any move to lift the sanctions."
Iran and its international interlocutors should learn from the past and manage expectations accordingly.
"There will not be any quick solutions (if, indeed, there are any solutions at all), given the parties’ diametrically opposed interests, their respective domestic and alliance-related obstacles, and a profound lack of trust on all sides."
"Moreover, aside from negotiating with the P5+1, Iran would be well advised to launch direct negotiations with the United States."
"It will also most likely have to improve its relations with Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, and change its behavior toward Israel, if a positive result is to be achieved."
"Similarly, the West will have to understand that the Islamic Republic is not a monolithic dictatorship."
"The regime has multiple coexisting power centers, which influence and limit each other’s decisions."
"The office of the president is just one power center. The same applies to the Supreme Leader, who, despite his title, is not an absolute ruler."
"Iran has tried two political approaches in the last ten years: a reformist model, under President Mohamed Khatami, and hardline radicalism, under Ahmadinejad."
Both approaches failed.
"The reformers could not overcome conservative opposition, while the radicals could not defeat the domestic economic realities wrought by their foreign and nuclear policies."
"Rowhani must seek a path that does not cost him the support of the majority of the regime’s power centers, yet that also allows him to fulfill the mandate he received from voters."
"At home, too, massive distrust will further complicate an inherently difficult task."
"In America and the West, many will probably regard Rowhani as the friendly face of the Islamic Republic, whereas Ahmadinejad was its true – because more radical – embodiment."
"Many Iranians, in turn, regard Obama as the friendly face of a US that still seeks regime change in their country, whereas his predecessor, George W. Bush, was America’s more honest – because more radical – representative."
"Both perceptions distort reality, though both contain a kernel of truth."
Despite these perceptions – or perhaps precisely because of them – Rowhani’s presidency offers an unexpected opportunity for both the nuclear negotiations and a political solution in Syria.
"Iran’s participation in an international peace conference is an absolute necessity, if only to test Rowhani’s seriousness."
"During the Afghanistan conference in Bonn in 2001, Iran behaved in a pragmatic, results-oriented way – an approach that went completely unrewarded by the US."
"As for the nuclear negotiations, the P5+1 will focus on objective guarantees that leave Iran no path toward military use of its nuclear capabilities."
"For Iran, the focal point of its efforts will be recognition of its right to civilian use of nuclear energy, in keeping with the provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and its protocols."
"Both issues sound simpler than they are: the devil is in the details, and the details leave ample scope for disagreement over the definition, monitoring, and enforcement of terms."
"Again, maintaining realistic expectations must be paramount."
A successful outcome in the nuclear negotiations and resolution or even containment of the main regional conflicts will be difficult to achieve.
"But it would be the height of irresponsibility not to seize the unexpected opportunity created by Rowhani’s election with all the strength, good faith, and creativity we can muster."
A New Model United Nation
"The award of the Nobel Prize for Peace to the United Nations and to its Secretary General, Kofi Annan, is a cause for true celebration everywhere."
But celebrations should never become an excuse for complacency.
"Yes, the UN has achieved much under Secretary General Annan's leadership. But the idea of the United Nations as a uniter of nations remains, in many parts of the world and for many of the world's most complex problems, more an ideal still to be achieved than a living reality."
Some of the most powerful nations in the world still do not see fully cooperating with or participating in UN affairs as in their interest.
"Beyond states, the world's many NGOs are growing fast and multiplying in their influence, but without formal rules to define their role in the international system."
"Their real power, despite Secretary General Annan's efforts to create a dialogue with them, stands outside the UN framework."
"Indeed, NGOs often assume tasks for which the current structure of the UN is unsuited or remains far too weak."
"To assist them in their tasks, and to assure that the great global issues of the day are addressed in a forum that unites and does not divide, the UN needs to be strengthened in the fields in which NGO's are working so impressively."
Such strengthening can only be achieved by a fundamental reform of the UN's internal structure.
"When the UN was founded in 1945, the primary objective was to prevent the outbreak of World War III."
"So, at its foundation, only one powerful body was introduced, the Security Council on which the world's great military powers sat."
"The agenda of the Security Council was and remains power, and meeting crises, mostly with military means."
"Today, however, the real threats to the majority of the world's population stems from dangers almost unknown back then: poverty, hunger, population growth, migration, the environment, and the like."
"For the UN to meet these challenges, its very structure must change."
"Two new councils, each with comparable power to the Security Council, are needed: a Social Council and an Economic Council."
"The IMF, World Bank, and WTO should not only report to, but be dependent upon this new UN reformed structure."
Why are these new bodies needed?
The world cannot do without rules; it cannot move forward against our age's most pressing problems without defined legal rules and the institutions that regulate international law.
"Because these institutions do not exist, the UN must now invent them."
"Of course some rules, such as rules governing the promulgation of trade sanctions, now exist within, say, the WTO."
"These rules, however, are but steps in the right direction: steps toward socially and ecologically sustainable free trade and against protectionism, especially that often practiced by rich countries."
"Across the board, more global rules are needed so that global efforts to confront poverty, disease, and mass migration can be made consistent, predictable and most of all effective."
"We have the Rome Statute of International Criminal Code; we are heading for an innovative guide to best practice on how civil society organizations can best contribute to the work of the UN; and we now have a large coalition, far beyond NATO, combatting terrorism."
"I am grateful that one of the reactions to September 11th was, if I am not mistaken, a somewhat changed attitude within the USA vis-à-vis the UN."
"But it is of a paramount importance that these kinds of change, namely, to incorporate real power into the structure of the UN, make more progress."
"In dangerous times such as these, the world's peoples need to prove their solidarity."
The large coalition now fighting terrorism is one way to demonstrate this.
But solidarity also must be recognized within the real power structures of the UN.
The Secretary General convocation of a ``Dialogue of Civilizations'' is but a start here.
Far more needs to be done.
The institution of Social and Economic Councils at the UN would mark an enormous step in the right direction.
I have tried to present the ideas outlined here not only to the General Assembly but also to the permanent members of the Security Council.
I have also been invited to present them to the US Senate.
"So far, none of those discussions have proved to be very fruitful."
"But just as the time is coming when the US will to come see the UN as indispensable, the Security Council and its members will come to see the creation of new bodies within the UN not as rivals, but as the only means for the world's people, in solidarity, to confront the myriad social and economic problems that they face."
A Second Chance for European Reform
"MUNICH – The European Central Bank has managed to calm the markets with its promise of unlimited purchases of eurozone government bonds, because it effectively assured bondholders that the taxpayers and pensioners of the eurozone’s still-sound economies would, if necessary, shoulder the repayment burden."
"Although the ECB left open how this would be carried out, its commitment whetted investors’ appetite, reduced interest-rate spreads in the eurozone, and made it possible to reduce the funding of crisis-stricken economies through the printing press (Target credit)."
This respite offers an ideal opportunity to push forward with reforms.
Greek Prime Minister Antonis Samaras must convince his countrymen that he is serious about implementing them.
Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy and Portuguese Finance Minister Vitor Gaspar deserve more support for their plans.
"And one can only hope that Italy’s caretaker prime minister, Mario Monti, contests the next general election."
All of these leaders understand what must be done.
"France, by contrast, does not appear to have noticed the writing on the wall."
President François Hollande wants to solve his country’s problems with growth programs.
"But when politicians say “growth,” they mean “borrowing.”"
That is the last thing that France needs.
"France’s debt/GDP ratio is already around 90%; even if its 2013 budget deficit does not exceed 3.5% of GDP, its debt/GDP ratio will have climbed to 93% by the end of the year."
"The government’s GDP share, at 56%, is the highest in the eurozone and second highest among all developed countries."
It is not only film actors like Gérard Depardieu who are leaving the country to escape its high taxes; industry is fleeing as well.
France’s once-proud carmakers are fighting for survival.
"Indeed, France’s manufacturing industry has shrunk to barely 9% of GDP, less than Britain’s manufacturing share (10%) and less than half of Germany’s (20%)."
Its current account is sliding into an ever-deeper deficit hole.
Unemployment is rising to record levels.
"France’s basic problem, like that of the countries most affected by the crisis, is that the wave of cheap credit that the euro’s introduction made possible fueled an inflationary bubble that robbed it of its competitiveness."
Goldman Sachs has calculated that France must become 20% cheaper to service its debt on a sustainable basis.
"The same is true of Spain, while Italy would have to become 10-15% cheaper and Greece and Portugal would need domestic prices to fall 30% and 35%, respectively."
"The OECD purchasing-power statistics paint a similar picture, with Greece needing to depreciate by 39% and Portugal by 32% just to reach the price level prevailing in Turkey."
"But, so far, virtually nothing has been done in this respect."
"Worse, some of the troubled countries’ inflation rates are still running higher than those of their trading partners."
"Eurozone politicians tend to believe that it is possible to regain competitiveness by carrying out reforms, undertaking infrastructure projects, and improving productivity, but without reducing domestic prices."
"That is a fallacy, because such steps improve competitiveness only in the same measure as they reduce domestic prices vis-à-vis eurozone competitors."
"There is no way around a reduction in relative domestic prices as long as these countries remain in the currency union: either they deflate, or their trading partners inflate faster."
There is no easy or socially comfortable way to accomplish this.
"In some cases, such a course can be so perilous that it should not be wished upon any society."
The gap is simply too large between what is needed to restore competitiveness and what citizens can stomach if they remain part of the monetary union.
"In order to become cheaper, a country’s inflation rate must stay below that of its competitors, but that can be accomplished only through an economic slump."
"The more trade unions defend existing wage structures, and the lower productivity growth is, the longer the slump will be."
"Spain and France would need a ten-year slump, with annual inflation 2% lower than that of their competitors, to regain their competitiveness."
"For Italy, the path toward competitiveness is shorter, but for Portugal and Greece it is substantially longer – perhaps too long."
"Italy, France, and Spain should be able to regain competitiveness in the eurozone within a foreseeable period of time."
"After all, Germany cut its prices relative to its eurozone trading partners by 22% from 1995, when the euro was definitively announced, to 2008, when the global financial crisis erupted."
"Ten years ago, Germany was like France is today – the sick man of Europe."
It suffered from increasing unemployment and a lack of investment.
"Most of its savings were being invested abroad, and its domestic net investment share was among the lowest of all OECD countries."
"Under growing pressure to act, Gerhard Schröder’s Social Democratic government decided in 2003 to deprive millions of Germans of their second-tier unemployment insurance, thus paving the way for the creation of a low-wage sector, in turn reducing the rate of inflation."
"Unfortunately, thus far, there is no sign that the crisis countries, above all France, are ready to bite the bullet."
"The longer they cling to a belief in magic formulas, the longer the euro crisis will be with us."
A New Path to a Low-Carbon Economy
"NEW YORK – The solution to manmade climate change depends on the transition to electricity production that, unlike burning oil, natural gas, and coal, emits little or no carbon dioxide – the main greenhouse gas responsible for global warming."
"Low-carbon electricity can be produced by solar, nuclear, and wind energy, or by coal-burning power plants that capture and store their CO2 emissions."
The policy problem is simple. Coal is a cheaper and more easily used energy source than the alternatives.
"It is cheap because it is plentiful. It is easier to use than wind or solar power because it can produce electricity around the clock, without reliance on weather conditions."
"To save the planet, we need to induce power suppliers to adopt low-carbon energy sources despite coal’s lower price and greater ease of use."
"The obvious way is to tax coal, or to require power plants to have permits to use coal, and to set the tax or permit price high enough to induce a shift towards the low-carbon alternatives."
"Suppose coal produces electricity at a cost of $0.06 per kilowatt-hour, while solar power costs $0.16/kilowatt-hour."
The tax on coal-based electricity would have to be $0.10/kilowatt-hour.
"In that case, consumers would pay $0.16/kilowatt-hour for either coal or solar."
The utilities would then shift to low-carbon solar power.
"The switchover, however, would more than double the electricity bill in this example."
"Politicians are loath to impose such a tax, fearing a political backlash."
"For years , this has stymied progress in the United States towards a low-carbon economy."
"Yet several European countries have successfully introduced the idea of a “feed-in tariff,” which provides the core of a politically acceptable long-term solution."
A feed-in tariff subsidizes the low-carbon energy source rather than taxing the high-carbon energy source.
"In our example, the government would pay a subsidy of $0.10/kilowatt-hour to the solar-power plant to make up the difference between the consumer price of $0.06 and the production cost of $0.16."
"The consumer price remains unchanged, but the government must somehow pay for the subsidy."
Here is another way.
"Suppose that we levy a small tax on existing coal power plants in order to pay for the solar subsidy, and then gradually raise consumers’ electricity bills as more and more solar plants are phased in."
"The price charged to consumers would rise gradually from $0.06/kilowatt-hour to the full cost of $0.16/kilowatt-hour, but over a phase-in period of, say, 40 years (the lifespan of the newest of today’s coal plants)."
"Assume that as of 2010, the entire electricity system is coal-based, and that the electricity price paid by the consumers is $0.06/kilowatt-hour."
"By 2014, suppose that 10% of the 40-year transition to solar power has been achieved."
"The consumer price is raised 10% of the way from $0.06 to $0.16, thus reaching $0.07/kilowatt-hour."
"The coal tax for 2014 is then set at $0.01/kilowatt-hour, which is just enough to pay the needed solar subsidy of $0.09/kilowatt-hour."
"Solar producers fully cover their costs of $0.16/kilowatt-hour, since they sell power to the consumers at $0.07/kilowatt-hour and receive a subsidy of $0.09/kilowatt-hour."
A small coal tax can support a large solar subsidy.
"Suppose, further, that by 2030 the transition to a low-carbon economy is halfway completed."
"The consumer price for electricity is now set at $0.11, exactly halfway between $0.06 and $0.16."
"The coal tax is now raised to $0.05/kilowatt-hour, just enough to cover the solar subsidy of $0.05/kilowatt-hour."
"Once again, the solar producers cover their costs exactly, since the subsidy of $0.05/kilowatt-hour closes the gap between the consumer price ($0.11/kilowatt-hour) and the producer cost ($0.16/kilowatt-hour)."
"Let us presume, finally, that by 2050, all electricity production has made the transition to low-carbon energy sources."
"The consumer price finally reaches $0.16/kilowatt-hour, enough to cover the full cost of solar power without a further subsidy."
"This approach allows higher consumer electricity prices to be phased in gradually, yet establishes strong, immediate incentives for adopting solar power."
"Moreover, the government budget is balanced every year, since the coal tax pays for the solar subsidy."
The actual transformation in the coming years will have one major advantage compared to this illustration.
"Today’s solar power plants might cost an extra $0.10/kilowatt-hour compared to coal, but such plants will be much less costly in the future because of improved technology."
"Thus, the magnitude of subsidies needed in a decade or two will be lower than they are today."
"Energy debates in the US, Australia, and other countries have centered so far on introducing a cumbersome cap-and-trade permit system."
"Every major user of fossil fuel would need to buy permits to emit CO2, and those permits would trade in a special marketplace."
The market price of the permits would be equivalent to paying a tax on CO2 emissions.
"Unfortunately, cap-and-trade systems are difficult to manage and don’t give clear signals about the future price of permits."
"Europe has adopted such a system, but other parts of the world have repeatedly rejected it."
"In fact, Europe’s biggest successes in promoting low-carbon energy have come from its feed-in tariffs, and carbon taxes in some countries, rather than its cap-and-trade system."
"The time has come for the US, China, India, and other major economies to declare how they will foster their own transition to a low-carbon economy."
"A small and gradually rising carbon tax that funds a feed-in tariff system could win political support in the US. It could also help to foster consensus among the major coal-based economies, including China and India."
There really are effective long-term solutions to manmade climate change that are politically acceptable and feasible to implement.
It is time to embrace them.
A New Start for Non-Proliferation
VIENNA – US President Barack Obama has injected fresh momentum into efforts – stalled for a decade – to bring about nuclear disarmament.
He has committed himself to the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons and acknowledges the link between nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament by the nuclear-weapon states.
"Obama has pledged to revitalize the 1970 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which aims to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons."
"The non-proliferation regime, of which the NPT is the cornerstone, is in disarray."
The main problems are easily identified.
"First, the five main nuclear-weapon states have not taken seriously their NPT obligation to work for nuclear disarmament."
"Instead, they have insisted that nuclear weapons are essential for their security and continued to modernize their nuclear arsenals."
"This naturally robs them of the moral authority to persuade others not to acquire nuclear weapons, which continue to be perceived as a source of power and influence, and an insurance policy against attack."
"Second, as we have seen in the case of North Korea, there is nothing to stop countries that sign the Treaty from simply walking out after declaring that “extraordinary events” have jeopardized their supreme interests."
"Third, the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is supposed to police the non-proliferation system, is shamefully underfunded."
"When it comes to determining whether or not a country is conducting a covert nuclear weapons program, IAEA inspectors often have their hands tied, either because they lack the legal authority to gain access to all the locations they consider necessary, or because the IAEA’s analytical laboratories are outdated, or because the Agency does not have adequate access to satellite imagery."
"Fourth, export controls have failed to prevent the spread of sensitive nuclear technology, not least due to the sophisticated efforts of clandestine networks like the one run by Pakistani nuclear scientist A.Q. Khan."
"Nine countries already have nuclear weapons, and it would be naive to presume that others, particularly in regions of conflict, will not try to get hold of them."
"In addition, a number of countries with nuclear energy programs have the capability, if they choose, to manufacture nuclear weapons within a matter of months if their security perceptions change, because they have mastered the critical technology – uranium enrichment and plutonium reprocessing."
"If more countries take this path, it could prove to be the Achilles’ heel of non-proliferation."
"Fifth, the international community, spearheaded by the United Nations Security Council, has more often than not been paralyzed in the face of challenges to international security and ineffectual in responding to suspected cases of nuclear proliferation."
These issues will not be resolved overnight.
But there is much that can be done relatively quickly.
"The United States and Russia have started negotiations on deep cuts in their nuclear arsenals, which together account for 95% of the world’s 27,000 warheads."
"Other key steps include bringing into force the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty; negotiating a verifiable treaty to end production of fissile material for use in weapons; radically improving the physical security of nuclear and radioactive materials, which is vital to prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists; and strengthening the IAEA."
"Last month, I proposed a key measure to strengthen non-proliferation to the IAEA’s Board of Governors – establishing an IAEA bank of low-enriched uranium (LEU) to guarantee supplies to countries that need nuclear fuel for their power reactors."
LEU cannot be used to make weapons.
Some such mechanism will be essential in the coming decades as more and more countries introduce nuclear energy.
My proposal is to create a physical stockpile of LEU at the disposal of the IAEA as a last-resort reserve for countries with nuclear power programs that face a supply disruption for non-commercial reasons.
"This would give countries confidence that they can count on reliable supplies of fuel to run their nuclear power plants, and therefore do not need to develop their own uranium-enrichment or plutonium-reprocessing capability."
"This could help to avoid a repeat of Iran’s experiences after its 1979 revolution, when contracts for fuel and technology for its planned nuclear power program were not honored."
"Thirty years later, some of the consequences are still being felt."
The LEU would be available to countries in need on the basis of non-political and non-discriminatory criteria.
It would be accessible at market prices to all states in compliance with their nuclear safeguards obligations.
No state would be required to give up the right to develop its own fuel cycle.
"The money needed to launch an LEU bank is in place, thanks primarily to a non-governmental organization – the Nuclear Threat Initiative – and initial funding from Warren Buffett."
But this can only be a first step.
"It should be followed by an agreement that all new enrichment and reprocessing activities will be placed exclusively under multinational control, and that all existing such facilities will be converted from national to multinational control."
"This is a bold idea, but bold ideas are needed now more than ever."
The opportunity to put the nuclear fuel cycle under multinational control was missed 60 years ago because of the Cold War.
The spread of nuclear technology and the growing risk of nuclear terrorism make it imperative that we get it right this time.
A New-State Solution for Israel and Palestine
PRINCETON – Imagine a two-state solution in Israel and Palestine in which Palestinians would have the right of return; Israelis could settle wherever they could purchase land in the West Bank; and Jerusalem need not be divided.
"This is not a fanciful vision, but a creative and eminently sensible reinvention of twenty-first century statehood."
And US President Barack Obama’s just-completed visit to Israel provides an opportunity to explore genuinely new thinking.
"Ever since Bill Clinton nearly succeeded in brokering a comprehensive settlement in 2000, the mantra among supporters of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has been that, while a solution exists, Israeli and Palestinian leaders who are willing to reach it do not."
"The solution is a version of the deal that Clinton sought: two sovereign states based on the 1967 borders, with negotiated land swaps to reflect existing settlement patterns. The agreement would include a land corridor connecting Gaza and the West Bank; a divided Jerusalem with guaranteed access for all to religious sites;"
Palestinians’ renunciation of the right of return; Israel’s willingness to dismantle settlements outside the agreed borders; and recognition of both states across the Middle East.
But suppose that the reason that no Palestinians and Israelis willing to conclude such a deal have emerged is that the solution itself is domestically unsupportable on both sides.
"Suppose that as long as a version of this deal is the only game in town, the creeping physical expansion of the Israeli state and the demographic expansion of Israeli Arabs will continue to erode its foundation."
"For all the dire warnings that the window for a two-state solution is rapidly closing (or has already closed), it is the solution itself that is the problem."
"In 2008, a Princeton University graduate student in philosophy named Russell Nieli gave a talk at the Princeton Center for Jewish Life that was so well received that he later expanded it into an article for the US-based magazine Tikkun, founded by Rabbi Michael Lerner."
"The article, “Toward a Permanent Palestinian/Israeli Peace – the Case for Two-State Condominialism,” was published with the express aim of stimulating “productive thinking among a younger generation of Jews and Arabs not bound by the restricted vision and failed policies of the past.”"
“Two-state condominialism” is as visionary as the name is clunky.
The core idea is that Israelis and Palestinians would be citizens of two separate states and thus would identify with two separate political authorities.
"Palestine would be defined as a state of the Palestinian people, and Israel as a Jewish state. Under “condominialism,” however, both Palestinians and Jews “would be granted the right to settle anywhere within the territory of either of the two states, the two states thus forming a single, binational settlement community.”"
Think about that for a minute.
"As Nieli describes it, Palestinians “would have the right to settle anywhere within Israel just as Jews would have the right to settle anywhere within the territory of the Palestinian state."
"Regardless of which of the two states they lived in, all Palestinians would be citizens of the Palestinian state, all Jews citizens of Israel.”"
"Each state would have the authority and the obligation to provide for the economic, cultural, religious, and welfare needs of its citizens living in the other state’s territory."
"These would be extraterritorial rights and responsibilities, just as the United States, for example, provides for its large numbers of expatriates, such as civilian dependents of US military personnel based abroad."
"To make this work, the borders of each state would first have to be defined – presumably on the basis of the 1967 borders, with mutually agreed territorial swaps."
"Israeli Arabs would then be required to transfer their citizenship, national identity, and national voting rights – but not their residence – to the new Palestinian state."
"They would have a permanent right to live in Israel and would retain the benefits to which they are currently entitled as Israeli citizens, but they would now vote as citizens of Palestine."
All other Palestinians living in Israel would have rights and benefits only under Palestinian law.
"Condominialism recognizes the reality of the deep interconnectedness of Israeli settlers in the West Bank with the rest of Israel –&#160;through roads, water supplies, electricity grids, administrative structures, and economic relationships (just as Israeli and Palestinian parts of Jerusalem are interdependent)."
"Instead of trying to separate and recreate all of these structures and relationships, it makes far more sense to build on them in ways that benefit both states’ peoples and economies."
"And, in a world in which many citizens spend an increasing proportion of their time in virtual space, de facto condominialism is already happening."
"In the 1950’s, after four decades of war across Europe, the idea of a European Union in which member states’ citizens could live and work freely across national borders while retaining their political allegiance and cultural identity seemed equally far-fetched."
"(Indeed, the name of the political process by which the EU was to be constructed, “neo-functionalism,” was every bit as abstract and cumbersome as “two-state condominialism.”)"
"Yet French and German statesmen summoned the vision and the will to launch a bold experiment, one that has evolved into a single economy of 500 million people."
Why shouldn’t another site of ancient enmities be the source of a new conception of statehood?
"Interestingly, many young people in the 1950’s, like my Belgian mother, ardently supported the vision of a new Europe."
"Today’s young Israelis and Palestinians pride themselves on their entrepreneurialism, with all the risk and vision that starting something new entails."
Supporting and contributing to an innovative political start-up would be their generation’s defining act.
A New Tang Dynasty?
"On August 8, 2008, the world watched with awe the amazing spectacle of the Olympics opening ceremony in Beijing."
"We saw the electronic unrolling of Chinese scrolls replete with great historic symbols and were mesmerized by dancers creating “harmony,” using their bodies as ink brushes."
"2008 martial arts students performed millennia-old moves with mechanical precision, while the flying celestials and the galloping torchbearer created a sense of heavenly abode on earth."
"There was another time when China dazzled the world at its doorstep: the Tang dynasty (618-907), often thought of as China’s golden age, when it was truly the “middle kingdom” at the center of the universe."
"Its capital, Chang Àn (modern day Xìan) was a world-class city; visitors came from all over the world and were dazzled by its wealth, beauty, and power."
"Its emperors used silver from Persia, glass from Europe, precious stones from Central Asia, and gold implements from India."
"Open, confident, and cosmopolitan, China connected with the world with ease, adopting new ideas, and projecting its own indigenous creations."
It’s no wonder that Chinese scholars sometimes refer to today’s China era as the new Tang Dynasty.
"Indeed, when China was awarded the Olympic Games in 2001, the country’s official news agency, Xinhua called it a “milestone in China’s rising international status and a historical event in the great renaissance of the Chinese nation.”"
"For seven years, Chinese officials and artists worked tirelessly to make this dream of a “renaissance” a glittering reality, and they exceeded all expectations. But how should we understand the broader implications of the opening ceremony, both for China and the outside world?"
"First, the good news."
"In keeping with China’s recent efforts to project its “soft” side, the opening ceremony produced the idea of a historic, but dynamic culture at its best. Other than the presence of a few People’s Liberation Army soldiers, you would have been hard pressed to find any visible evidence of the reigning communist regime or its founder, Mao Zedong."
Equally significant was the projection of China as a nascent leader of the new international cultural order.
"The “Bird’s Nest” stadium was the creation of the multinational design team of Herzog &amp; de Meuron, with suggestions from the visual artist Ai Weiwei."
"Many artists involved in the creation of the spectacle, including the fireworks specialist Cai Guo Qiang, the dance star Shen Wei, and the composer Tan Dun, earned their fame primarily in the West."
"Even Zhang Yimou, the lead impresario for the event, gained fame in the West through his early films chronicling the hard life of a young modern China."
Chinese officials had clearly decided that these diaspora darlings of the international art scene should be now claimed as China’s own.
These artists’ ability to the bridge traditions of East and West and to create a new space for creativity that can transcend the cultural specificities of the past in favor of a new blended future could be squarely associated with China’s own global aspirations.
"Like the artists and their art, the country could elevate itself from the dichotomies of old-new, past-present, and traditional-modern to project an image appropriate to our globalizing age."
"Not surprisingly, Chinese leadership was keen to avoid any reference to the last two centuries of struggle and humiliation, or to its problematic political agendas and thorny trade issues."
"At the same time, it could be argued that the spectacle of the opening ceremony was intended to overcome China’s historic humiliation by the West and signal a new chapter."
"The “sleeping dragon,” as Napoleon described China in the early nineteenth century, was now fully awake, ready to charge into the new world."
"As in the Tang Dynasty, arts and culture were at center stage, reflecting the country’s economic prowess and political might."
But the extravaganza also left lingering doubts.
Why such a drive to prove to the world that these had to be the very best Olympics ever?
(Chinese authorities even pressed the International Olympic Committee to make such a declaration at the conclusion of the games.)
Some have suggested that the effort suggests a hint of insecurity.
"It should also be noted that while Mao was conspicuously absent in the Olympics, his communist legacy was present in subtle ways."
"The relentless emphasis on the “harmonious” presence of large groups of performers left no room for individual voices (even the young singer Lin Miaoke, as we now know, didn’t have her own voice)."
"Ironically, while younger Chinese (products of China’s one-child policy) are obsessed with personal stylistic statements, the drama of the opening ceremony consisted in collective expression at the service of the state."
Chinese intellectuals have always been cognizant of this tension between individual creativity and collective will.
How will the new China balance these two conflicting needs?
"As we contemplate the potential arrival of the new Tang Dynasty in China, we should remember the message of the old Tang Dynasty poet, Po Chü-i (772-846 AD):"
"Sent as a present from Annam,"
A red cockatoo.
"Colored like the peach-tree blossom,"
Speaking with the speech of men.
And they did to it what is always done
To the learned and eloquent.
They took a cage with stout bar
And shut it up inside.
A New US Agenda for Latin America
"MEXICO CITY – For the next American president, fixing the international mess inherited from the Bush administration will be no simple task."
"While Latin America will not be a priority for either an Obama or McCain administration, continuing the United States’ neglect of the last seven years is no longer viable."
"Two distinct political/diplomatic challenges stand out: Cuba’s imminent transition or succession crisis, and the continuing ascent of the region’s “two lefts,” one represented by Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez and the other by Brazil’s increasingly influential President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva."
"The next US administration will only prove successful if it grasps that Latin America is living through a moment that combines the best and worst aspects of its history: the fastest economic growth since the 1970’s, with poverty and inequality diminishing, and more democratic and respectful of human rights than ever before, but becoming more politically polarized."
"In Cuba, Fidel Castro’s eventual passing from the scene represents an immense challenge."
The US cannot continue with the failed policies of the past half-century.
Demanding a full-fledged democratic transition as a pre-condition for normalizing US-Cuban relations is both unrealistic and unpalatable to Latin America.
"Yet the US cannot set aside the question of democracy and human rights in Cuba while it awaits the departure of Fidel’s brother, Raúl."
"Realpolitik and fear of another exodus of Cuban refugees across the Florida Straits may tempt the US to pursue a “Chinese” or “Vietnamese” solution to Cuba: normalizing diplomatic relations in exchange for economic reform, while leaving the question of internal political change until later."
But the US should not succumb to this temptation.
"The US, Canada, Europe, and Latin America have constructed a regional legal framework, which must not be abandoned, to defend democratic rule and human rights in the hemisphere."
"Cuba needs to return to the regional concert of powers, but it must accept this concert’s rules."
"Holding free and fair elections may not be the primary issue, but nor are they issues that should be shelved in the interests of stability and expediency."
Elections must instead be part of a comprehensive process of normalization: they should neither be a deal-breaker nor a non-issue.
"While the US should lift its trade embargo as soon as Cuba’s transition begins, everything else should be conditional on Cuba initiating a process of resolving all outstanding issues."
But Cuba is just part of what might be called Latin America’s “left” problem.
"Indeed, much has been written recently about the ascent of the left in Latin America over the past decade."
"In fact, there are two lefts in the region: a modern, democratic, globalized and market-friendly left, found in Chile, Brazil, Uruguay, parts of Central America, and, up to a point, in Peru; and a retrograde, populist, authoritarian, statist, and anti-American left, found in Mexico, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Cuba, Ecuador, Bolivia, Venezuela, and, to a lesser extent, in Argentina, Colombia, and Paraguay."
"Some of these “lefts” are in power; some, as in Mexico in its last, disputed presidential election, barely missed conquering it, but may still do so."
"Over the past two years, it has become increasingly evident that the “modern” or “soft” left is, all in all, governing well."
The other left has proved to be more extreme and erratic than many anticipated.
"The former feels no urge to “export” its “model,” whereas the latter has a strategy and the means to do so."
"The retrograde left today can realize Che Guevara’s old dream: not “one, two, many Vietnams,” but “one, two, many Venezuelas,” winning power by the ballot and then conserving and concentrating it through constitutional changes and the creation of armed militias and monolithic parties."
"It can finance all of this with the support of Venezuela’s state oil company, implementing social policies that are misguided over the long term but seductive in the short run, especially when carried out by Cuban doctors, teachers, and instructors."
"Herein lies a dilemma for the next US president: how to address the clear rift between the two lefts in a way that improves US-Latin American relations, fortifies the modern left, and weakens the retrograde left without resorting to the failed interventionist policies of the past."
"The best, strictly Latin America-focused steps, are self-evident, if not easily achievable."
"They require strengthening those governments of the modern left, or those of the center or center-right threatened by the old-fashioned left, and simultaneously making it clear to the latter that there is a price to be paid for violating the basic tenets of democracy, respect for human rights, and the rule of law."
Turning its back in the face of such challenges is no longer a viable American option.
"Aside from areas of particular concern (oil, arms, guerrillas, drugs), the US needs Latin America dearly nowadays because resistance to it is springing up everywhere, and with greater virulence than at any time since World War II’s end."
The next US president must reinvigorate a relationship that is ready to be substantially transformed for the first time since Franklin Roosevelt’s Good Neighbor Policy of seven decades ago.
A New World Architecture
"NEW YORK – Twenty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of communism, the world is facing another stark choice between two fundamentally different forms of organization: international capitalism and state capitalism."
"The former, represented by the United States, has broken down, and the latter, represented by China, is on the rise."
Following the path of least resistance will lead to the gradual disintegration of the international financial system.
A new multilateral system based on sounder principles must be invented.
"While international cooperation on regulatory reform is difficult to achieve on a piecemeal basis, it may be attainable in a grand bargain that rearranges the entire financial order."
"A new Bretton Woods conference, like the one that established the post-WWII international financial architecture, is needed to establish new international rules, including treatment of financial institutions that are too big to fail and the role of capital controls."
It would also have to reconstitute the International Monetary Fund to reflect better the prevailing pecking order among states and to revise its methods of operation.
"In addition, a new Bretton Woods would have to reform the currency system."
"The post-war order, which made the US more equal than others, produced dangerous imbalances."
"The dollar no longer enjoys the trust and confidence that it once did, yet no other currency can take its place."
The US ought not to shy away from wider use of IMF Special Drawing Rights.
"Because SDRs are denominated in several national currencies, no single currency would enjoy an unfair advantage."
"The range of currencies included in the SDRs would have to be widened, and some of the newly added currencies, including the renminbi, may not be fully convertible. This would, however, allow the international community to press China to abandon its exchange-rate peg to the dollar and would be the best way to reduce international imbalances."
"And the dollar could still remain the preferred reserve currency, provided it is prudently managed."
"One great advantage of SDRs is that they permit the international creation of money, which is particularly useful at times like the present."
"The money could be directed to where it is most needed, unlike what is happening currently."
"A mechanism that allows rich countries that don’t need additional reserves to transfer their allocations to those that do is readily available, using the IMF’s gold reserves."
"Reorganizing the world order will need to extend beyond the financial system and involve the United Nations, especially membership of the Security Council."
"That process needs to be initiated by the US, but China and other developing countries ought to participate as equals."
"They are reluctant members of the Bretton Woods institutions, which are dominated by countries that are no longer dominant."
The rising powers must be present at the creation of this new system in order to ensure that they will be active supporters.
"The system cannot survive in its present form, and the US has more to lose by not being in the forefront of reforming it."
"The US is still in a position to lead the world, but, without far-sighted leadership, its relative position is likely to continue to erode."
"It can no longer impose its will on others, as George W. Bush’s administration sought to do, but it could lead a cooperative effort to involve both the developed and the developing world, thereby reestablishing American leadership in an acceptable form."
"The alternative is frightening, because a declining superpower losing both political and economic dominance but still preserving military supremacy is a dangerous mix."
We used to be reassured by the generalization that democratic countries seek peace.
"After the Bush presidency, that rule no longer holds, if it ever did."
"In fact, democracy is in deep trouble in America."
The financial crisis has inflicted hardship on a population that does not like to face harsh reality.
"President Barack Obama has deployed the “confidence multiplier” and claims to have contained the recession. But if there is a “double dip” recession, Americans will become susceptible to all kinds of fear mongering and populist demagogy."
"If Obama fails, the next administration will be sorely tempted to create some diversion from troubles at home – at great peril to the world."
Obama has the right vision.
"He believes in international cooperation, rather than the might-is-right philosophy of the Bush-Cheney era."
The emergence of the G-20 as the primary forum of international cooperation and the peer-review process agreed in Pittsburgh
"What is lacking, however, is a general recognition that the system is broken and needs to be reinvented."
"After all, the financial system did not collapse altogether, and the Obama administration made a conscious decision to revive banks with hidden subsidies rather than to recapitalize them on a compulsory basis."
"Those institutions that survived will hold a stronger market position than ever, and they will resist a systematic overhaul."
"Obama is preoccupied by many pressing problems, and reinventing the international financial system is unlikely to receive his full attention."
China’s leadership needs to be even more far-sighted than Obama is.
"China is replacing the American consumer as the motor of the world economy. Since it is a smaller motor, the world economy will grow slower, but China’s influence will rise very fast."
"For the time being, the Chinese public is willing to subordinate its individual freedom to political stability and economic advancement. But that may not continue indefinitely – and the rest of the world will never subordinate its freedom to the prosperity of the Chinese state."
"As China becomes a world leader, it must transform itself into a more open society that the rest of the world is willing to accept as a world leader. Military power relations being what they are, China has no alternative to peaceful, harmonious development.  Indeed, the future of the world depends on it."
A New Year\u0027s Resolution
"It is time for New Year's resolutions, and this year's are obvious."
"When the millennium opened, world leaders pledged to seek peace, the end of poverty, and a cleaner environment."
"Since then, the world has seen countless acts of violence, terrorism, famine, and environmental degradation."
"In 2005, we can begin to change direction."
"Knowledge, scientific advance, travel, and global communications give us many opportunities to find solutions for the world's great problems."
"When a new disease called SARS hit China last year, the World Health Organization coordinated the actions of dozens of governments, and the crisis was quickly brought under control, at least for now."
"When Bill Gates donated $1 billion to bring vaccines to poor children, he made it possible to protect tens of millions of young people from preventable diseases."
"When an agricultural research unit called the World Agroforestry Center discovered that a certain tree could help African farmers grow more food, they introduced a new and valuable approach to overcoming Africa's chronic food crisis."
"Unfortunately, such examples of international cooperation are as rare as they are impressive."
"With our knowledge, science, and technology, the horrendous living conditions of the world's poorest people could be dramatically improved."
"Millions of people could be spared malaria, HIV/AIDS, hunger, and life in slums."
The problem is not that we lack good solutions.
The problem is that we fail to cooperate globally to put those solutions into practice.
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan has honored me by making me his Special Adviser on the Millennium Development Goals and asking me to lead a group of scholars and development experts in identifying practical steps to reach the goals by the target date in 2015.
"This effort, known as the UN Millennium Project, will issue its report to Secretary-General Annan on January 17, 2005."
"Our study, Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals , will be available for free around the world at www.unmillenniumproject.org ."
What we learned is easily summarized.
"For every major problem - hunger, illiteracy, malnutrition, malaria, AIDS, drought, and so forth - there are practical solutions that are proven and affordable."
"These investments, in turn, would strengthen the private sector and economic growth."
Yet they require global partnership between the rich and poor countries of the world.
"Most importantly, the world's richest countries need to do much more to help the poorest countries make use of modern science and technology to solve these great problems."
"The US, for example, currently spends around $450 billion each year on its military, but less than $15 billion to help the world's poorest countries fight disease, educate their children, and protect the environment."
"This is a mistake, because military approaches alone cannot make America safe."
Only shared prosperity can truly make the planet secure.
The US should be investing much more in peaceful economic development.
"Germany, Japan, and several other rich countries are also doing much less than they should - and much less than they promised the poor countries that they would do."
"In 2002, all donor countries committed to ""make concrete efforts"" to reach 0.7% of national income in development aid to poor countries."
"Germany, Japan, and the US, among others, remain far below this commitment."
The year 2005 will offer many opportunities for citizens around the world to insist that their leaders keep their Millennium promises.
"After our report is issued in January, Secretary-General Kofi Annan will issue a report to the world in the spring, identifying the practical steps that should be taken this year."
"Around the same time, an important commission on Africa will issue a report to United Kingdom Prime Minister Tony Blair."
"Then, in July, the UK will host the annual G-8 Summit of the rich countries."
Blair has promised that he will make the fight against poverty and long-term climate change the two priorities of the summit.
"In September, the world's leaders will reconvene at the UN to decide on their actions during the coming decade."
The rich and powerful nations often declare their leadership in the world.
"The US claims that it helps the world fight poverty, but instead spends its money on weapons."
"Germany and Japan say that they want a permanent seat on the UN Security Council, but neither has yet followed through on its own pledges to help the world's poorest people."
The world's poorest countries will ask themselves why they should vote for Germany and Japan to have permanent seats on the Security Council if they can't keep their promises.
"Nothing would be wiser for the world's rich countries than to fulfill their pledges to the world's poor, hungry and disease-ridden peoples."
Therein lies the path to sustained peace.
"2005 is the year that words can become reality, and that the world can begin to fulfill its hopes for our new millennium."
Let us make our leaders aware that we aspire to shared peace and prosperity.
"Let us pledge that the rich and powerful should take real actions to help the poor, the weak, and the suffering."
An External Stability Pact for Europe
BERLIN – The current economic crisis has exposed two fundamental problems in the design of the European Monetary Union.
The first concerns the sustainability of public finances in a number of euro-zone member states.
"Second, inadequate macroeconomic policy coordination has resulted in divergences in the international competitiveness of euro-zone members, threatening the very existence of the euro."
Countries whose public finances seemed fundamentally sound as late as last year have come under severe fiscal pressure.
"Ireland’s government debt is expected to rise to almost 80% of GDP by 2010, whereas just a year ago the European Commission projected that Ireland’s government debt would be below 30% of GDP."
"Likewise, whereas Spain was expected to decrease its debt ratio, its debt-to-GDP ratio is now likely to double between 2007 and 2010, to more than 60%."
The EU’s fiscal surveillance mechanisms failed to predict these developments because they neglect a crucial variable: the dynamics of private-sector debt.
"Given the high economic costs of a banking crisis, governments are likely to take on the liabilities of their financial sector when a crisis hits – as recently occurred in the United Kingdom and Ireland, and in financial crises in Latin America and Asia in the 1990’s."
The same is probably true when key business sectors near insolvency.
A country with sound public finances can thus become a fiscal basket case practically overnight.
"Given the increasingly close financial and economic linkages between euro-zone members, rising government debt in even one EMU country can have serious consequences for all members, because no member state will allow another to default."
"Thus, EMU members indirectly share the liability for fellow countries’ private-sector debt, which for this reason should be monitored within the EMU’s surveillance framework."
Another apparent problem is that EMU member states – at least until now – do not coordinate their economic policies effectively.
"Even before the crisis, this resulted in divergences in competitiveness and in the business cycle."
The persistent loss in competitiveness over the past decade is one reason why the crisis is hitting some southern European EMU countries such as Spain and Italy so hard.
The inefficiency of fiscal-policy control and the lack of economic convergence are a matter of increasing concern to both the European Central Bank and euro-zone finance ministers.
"While no initiative for coping with these problems has been tabled so far, the issue is certain to become a matter of debate within the EMU."
"One way to tackle the problems associated with government debt, as well as to improve economic policy coordination, is through a simple extension of existing rules: an “External Stability Pact” could be introduced to complement current EMU regulations."
This pact would monitor current-account imbalances and penalize excessive deficits or surpluses in the external account.
"Monitoring external balances can be an effective tool to measure future default risks, since sustained current-account deficits lead to a growth in net foreign debt."
"Moreover, there is a direct relationship between the EMU countries’ private-sector debt dynamics and their current-account imbalances within the euro zone."
"So long as a national government is not running more than a modest deficit, a current-account deficit reflects the private sector’s borrowing from abroad (or the sale of previously accumulated foreign assets)."
"If the current-account balance is assessed together with the fiscal position, it becomes possible to draw conclusions about risky debt trends within the private sector."
"The mathematics of debt dynamics suggest that no euro-zone country should have a current-account imbalance, whether a deficit or a surplus, of more than 3% of GDP."
Exceptions could be granted for countries with large inflows of foreign direct investment in greenfield projects.
The rule should apply both to debtor and creditor countries.
"After all, payment imbalances always have two sides, and the burden of adjustment should not be borne only by deficit countries."
Such a pact would oblige governments to use fiscal and wage policies as well as overall economic policy to achieve external balance.
"It would also lead to broader economic-policy coordination, particularly with respect to wage-setting, because governments would be compelled to use national legislation and public-sector wage settlements to influence wage policy in such a way that imbalances among euro-zone countries are reduced."
"Furthermore, an External Stability Pact would oblige governments to take into account the consequences for other member states when designing national economic reforms."
"If a “surplus country” such as Germany wanted to lower non-wage labor costs and increase value-added tax in order to boost its competitiveness, it would simultaneously have to adopt an expansive fiscal policy to compensate for the negative effects on its partners’ foreign trade."
"Within the framework of these rules, individual countries would retain the authority to design their policies."
"The Spanish government, for example, could have met Spain’s building boom and foreign-trade deficit with tax increases or by urging domestic wage restraint."
"Alternatively, it could have intervened by instituting planning regulations or imposing limits on mortgage loans."
"An External Stability Pact would not only detect risks to fiscal stability early on; it would also help make a reality of a fundamental principle of EU law, namely that member states finally treat economic policy as a “common interest.”"
Angela Bismarck Thatcher
"BERLIN – The European Union’s recent summit has brought about a typically European compromise on the Greek financial crisis, one that avoids the term “solution” and hides behind the idea of a “mechanism.”"
"Whether it works will be seen in April, when Greece will have to refinance its debt once more."
"German Chancellor Angela Merkel prevailed with her demand that the International Monetary Fund participate in a Greek bailout, should one be necessary."
"Moreover, the final decision on such a bailout will require, as before, unanimity in European bodies, meaning it will remain under German control."
"French President Nicolas Sarkozy, meanwhile, secured eurozone participation in a bailout for Greece."
"For Germany, this would entail a payment of up to €4 billion and – anathema! – the de facto end of the bailout ban in Article 125 of the EU’s Maastricht Treaty, despite a lot of verbal juggling intended to “prove” that the agreement on Greece conforms with the ban."
"Sarkozy also wanted, and received, increased economic coordination within the European Council."
The exclusion of members who violate the Maastricht Treaty is off the table.
"In fact, aside from some additional minor points, the European Council’s resolution differs from the previous compromise in only one respect: IMF participation."
"If Germany needed the Fund’s involvement to save face domestically and because of a decision by its Constitutional Court, was it really necessary to wreak such unparalleled havoc in Europe just to bring that about?"
Everyone involved could have lived with this compromise; it was the political confrontation that preceded it that made agreement difficult.
"Indeed, the European confrontation Merkel initiated (shame on you if you see a connection with the upcoming German elections) has changed the EU forever."
"In the German media, references to Margaret Thatcher and Otto von Bismarck abound, with Merkel hailed as an Iron Lady, even an Iron Chancellor."
"You can only shake your head at the decline in Germans’ historical awareness, given that neither Thatcher nor Bismarck has ever been a role model for Germany’s European policy, and for good reason!"
"Neither of them thought much, if anything, of European integration."
Why even think of Bismarck if you want European amity?
Injecting Bismarck’s name into the debate will undoubtedly trouble Franco-German cooperation.
"You could disregard all this as typical exaggeration if German domestic reaction did not demonstrate a clearly identifiable trend, namely Germany’s withdrawal as a motor of European integration as it increasingly pursues its more narrowly defined national interests."
"“But that’s what the others do, too,” is the answer you hear more and more often in Germany nowadays."
"That is true, except that Germany is not like the “others.”"
"Because of its size, location, and history, Germany has a specific role to play within that unique structure – sandwiched between national and European interests – that is the EU."
"If Germany no longer acts as the driving force of European integration, then European integration is a thing of the past."
"If Germany no longer Europeanizes its more narrowly defined national interests, but pursues them as others do, the result will be a re-nationalization within the EU."
"To what extent the EU can take this strain, only time will tell."
"So far, Germany has always been the motor of European integration, in accordance with its political and economic interests."
The consequences of Germany’s renunciation of that role are predictable: the EU will regress from a union of states moving towards ever closer integration to a weak confederation dominated by conflicting national interests.
"This is the British idea of Europe, and the German Constitutional Court, too, would probably be happy about such a development."
But to call this U-turn a stroke of political genius that saved the euro and Helmut Kohl’s European legacy is simply delusional.
It is best not to think about what this trend towards a weak EU will mean for Europe’s future in an international environment challenged by new players and dimensions.
"But why, in light of these developments, the EU bothered to enact the Lisbon Treaty is increasingly hard to understand."
"After all, this treaty is about the last thing a mere confederation needs."
In Defense of Angela Merkel
"PARIS – The recent cover of Der Spiegel showing German Chancellor Angela Merkel in front of the Acropolis surrounded by Nazi officers serves an important purpose: it finally poses, in a way that cannot be evaded, the question of Germanophobia in Europe."
The abuse of Germany has dragged on for quite some time.
Demonstrations in Cyprus in March 2013 included banners bearing caricatures of Merkel done up as Adolf Hitler.
"In Valencia at around the same time, on the occasion of the annual Fallas celebration, there was Merkel as an evil headmistress delivering to the head of the Spanish government and his ministers “The Ten Commandments of Angela the Exterminator.”"
She ended up being burned in effigy in the flames of the bonfires of St. Joseph.
"Two months later, in Portugal, similar parades featured the same Hitlerized Merkel caricatures, borne by howling demonstrators dressed in mourning clothes and decrying the German leader’s “policy of massacring the poor.”"
"And, naturally, there was Greece, where the phenomenon reached its apogee during the near-riots of October 2012, in which the world was treated to the spectacle of Nazi and German flags flown together – and then burned – together before the Acropolis in scenes that presaged the Der Spiegel cover."
"In Italy, the right-wing daily newspaper Il Giornale had no scruples about devoting its headline for August 3, 2012, to the emergence of the “Fourth Reich.”"
"Likewise, conspiracy websites in the countries of northern Europe claim that Germany’s eagerness to support Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko against Russian President Vladimir Putin is a reenactment of Hitler’s subjugation of Ukraine."
"Then there is France, where the game seems to be to see who can come out on top in populist denunciations of the new and detestable “German empire.”"
"From the extreme right, National Front leader Marine Le Pen chides Merkel for the “suffering” that she is imposing on the peoples of Europe."
"From the opposite extreme, we have the Left Party’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon thundering against Merkel’s “austerity” policy and inviting her to “shut up.”"
"The problem with this Germanophobia is not simply that it is stupid, or that it is yet another symptom of the decomposition, before our eyes, of the noble European project of integration and ever-closer union."
"No, the problem with today’s Germanophobia is that, contrary to what the sorcerer’s apprentices who stoke it would have us believe, their behavior is not a sign of their opposition to the true fascism that lies on the horizon, but rather of their allegiance – and even contribution – to it."
Why?
There are several reasons.
"For starters, to oppose Germany’s social, economic, and foreign policies by equating Merkel with Hitler is to banalize Hitler."
"However legitimate disagreement with those policies may be, Germany is one of the continent’s most scrupulous and exemplary democracies."
"To say that it resembles in any way the Nazi regime – which in Europe still stands for the destruction of democracy (indeed, civilization itself) – is to exonerate that regime, and to reassure and encourage today’s neo-fascists, allowing them, whether intentionally or not, to reenter the public debate."
"What is more (and this is key), those keenest to discredit Merkel just happen to be the same people who do not hesitate to waltz with Viennese neo-Nazis or to form an alliance, as in Athens, with the leaders of a genuinely extremist party."
"All of the clamor raised around a Germany that has supposedly “reunited with its demons” masks the voice of fascistic parties – from Greece’s Golden Dawn to Hungary’s Jobbik, Slovakia’s SNS, Belgium’s Vlaams Belang, and Bulgaria’s Ataka – that are in the process of establishing themselves in Europe."
"It should also be noted that Merkel is a woman, and that hatred for women – the disdain in which they, right alongside the Jews, were regarded by the racist theoreticians of the 1920s and 1930s – has been an essential dimension of every expression of fascism."
"Likewise, the slogans slung about in Valencia in October 2012 – with demonstrators urged to chant at the chancellor’s effigy, “You will love money above all else” and “You will honor the banks and the Bank” – had the unmistakably foul odor of the old mantras about “the golden calf” and the “cosmopolitan plutocracy.”"
"People have finally come to understand that anti-Americanism, born on the extreme right and fed, in Germany, for example, by the philosophy of Martin Heidegger and his acolytes, is a fixture of fascism."
It is now time for us to understand that the same is true of Germanophobia.
"In France, it appeared with the French anti-Semitic novelist and activist Maurice Barrès, who saw in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant a vehicle for the “Jewification” of European minds."
It triumphed with Charles Maurras’ Action Française and its protracted war with “Jewish and Germanic abstractions.”
"And it culminated with the red-brown cells that, even today, on sites that I prefer not to mention, offer “grub” and a “hideout” for persons willing to “bump off” the “bosses” on the chancellor’s “payroll.”"
"The history of ideas has its logic, reason, and folly, its unconscious and its trajectory."
It is both futile and dangerous to deny any of them.
"That is why, today, it is critically important, in the face of a dark force that is rising, swelling, and unfurling in Europe, to defend Angela Merkel."
Angela Merkel Meets the World
"At long last, Angela Merkel is Germany’s new – and first woman – Chancellor."
"Although continuity will remain the hallmark of foreign policy, Germany’s international engagement under Merkel will sound and feel different from that under Gerhard Schroeder’s leadership."
"Schroeder came to power seven years ago representing a new generation whose formative experience was not the Cold War, European integration, and transatlantic friendship, but German unification and the restoration of national sovereignty."
"For him and the team that took over after Helmut Kohl’s 16-year reign, Germany had become a normal country, no different from other European heavyweights like France or Britain."
"Indeed, one of Schroeder’s first major foreign-policy experiences was the EU summit of 1999, where the leaders of France and Britain played rough with the newcomer from Berlin."
The lesson that Schroeder drew was to insist that Germany could no longer be taken for granted and would demand a role commensurate to its size and weight.
Self-assertion became the watchword of German foreign policy.
"Thus, when Schroeder claimed special circumstances for Germany’s failure to meet the budgetary ceilings of the European Union’s Stability and Growth Pact, he seemed to be arguing that the restrictions should apply only to smaller countries, not to the big players."
"When he rightly opposed America’s war against Iraq, the pride of standing up to the world's only superpower was palpable."
"When he established a close personal and political relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin, he signaled to the world – and to the EU’s sensitive new Eastern European members – that Germany’s foreign policy would no longer be constrained by the past."
"In fairness, it should be acknowledged that it was under Schroeder that Germany shed hesitations to deploy soldiers abroad."
"His support for international crisis missions in Kosovo, Bosnia, or Afghanistan required considerable political courage and made Germany one of the major contributors to international stability efforts."
To have removed the issue from domestic ideological controversy ranks as a major achievement of Schroeder’s tenure.
But it was also meant to convey that Germany had grown up into a proper international power.
"With Merkel, the substance of Germany’s foreign policy will change little, but the assertive style will be muted."
American leaders will welcome her election as proof that the estrangement in bilateral relations is over.
"But that alienation already largely ended earlier this year, when the Bush administration realized that allies are good to have and that Germany is an important one."
"Merkel will reintroduce the warmth that has been missing under Schroeder, but she will not become America’s yes-woman."
"Nor will she abandon special relations with Russia, to which every German chancellor since Adenauer has attached major importance."
But she has already made clear that Germany’s neighbors to the East will have no reason not feel bypassed.
She may even want to confirm that message by making her first official trip abroad not to Paris but to Warsaw or Vilnius.
"On the European project, she is as committed to integration as her predecessors have been."
She will continue to emphasize close relations with France because there is no alternative;
"Britain, absent from the euro zone and the Schengen border regime, remains the odd man-in of the EU."
But there will be no new initiatives on integration until leaders in the countries that rejected the Constitutional Treaty are ready for a new try.
Then Merkel will be in a key position to add weight to a new effort for moving the EU forward.
"She will continue to favor the eventual admission of the Balkan states, but she has left no doubt of her opposition to full membership for Turkey, which is the major substantive change from the Schroeder era (although her government will not block the start of negotiations in early October)."
"In fact, there is very little Merkel has to do after her election to make her mark on foreign policy; the visible change of style will suffice, at least at first."
"In any case, she will have her hands full pushing through the economic reforms for which she will be elected and which are her top priority."
"There are indications that Germany is finally emerging from years of economic stagnation, not least thanks to the reforms started under Schroeder."
"At home, Merkel can hope to reap the rewards."
"Abroad, Merkel has no need to demonstrate that Germany is a big country in Europe; her partners are fully aware of this."
"But it is also more than just a normal country: Germany remains central to holding together the two international institutions that will continue to assure its well-being, the European Union and the Atlantic alliance."
There are some indications that Merkel is more aware of this then Schroeder was.
One can only hope that this recognition will serve as her guidepost when tough decisions must be made and changes in style alone will not be enough.
Angela Merkel’s Fear of Europe
"BERLIN – Ever since the global financial crisis erupted in September 2008, the European Union has been in turmoil."
"On the one hand, the euro protected the eurozone, particularly Germany’s export economy, from speculative attacks and the chaos of currency volatility."
"On the other hand, the second phase of the crisis mercilessly exposed the euro’s Achilles heel: the absence of economic or financial unification within the eurozone."
Rising tensions within the EU have been the inevitable result.
Germany’s actions throughout the crisis have been plainly contradictory.
"Rather than moving forward in the direction of an economic union, it reverted to a policy favoring national solutions. But that position is difficult to reconcile with Germany’s inability to call into question the euro or European structures and treaties."
The contradictory stance of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government was exacerbated by the transition from the grand coalition during her first term to the current conservative/liberal coalition.
"At that point, self-inflicted domestic political weakness collided with the fiscal constraints of the euro rescue."
"At first, Merkel had a hard time getting the Bundestag – and even the parties in her government – to approve the initial “small” rescue package for the euro, promising that Germany would not have to pay any more than that."
"By nightfall on the same day, however, she had to assent to the much larger €750 billion rescue package in order to prevent an EU-wide disaster. That created a multi-layered credibility problem for Merkel that continues to haunt her."
Merkel still hasn’t figured out how to explain the consequences of the financial and euro crises to the German people.
"That is not only because she is a poor public speaker, but also because she herself does not seem to know how to resolve the contradictions between national solutions and European constraints."
"Her style of leadership, which has mostly consisted of taking a wait-and-see approach to issues, fits this uncertainty well."
"Only at the last moment, when it is clear where the majority lies, does she embrace a solution."
"Even when times were better, Merkel’s passive political style allowed vacuums to form, which were filled by other political forces within her party."
"As a result, while Merkel may appear to be in charge of things in the EU these days, in reality she is no longer driving events, but rather being driven by them."
"Without regard for the political consequences, Merkel is trying to escape the specifically German contradiction between national solutions and European constraints by advocating a rigorous fiscal-consolidation program, severe punishment for non-compliance (including loss of EU voting rights), and a trigger mechanism for member states that lag in meeting their obligations."
"In Berlin, the term for this is “a Europe of stability and solidity.”"
It is a credo for which Germany will have to pay dearly in the future.
Merkel’s proposals do not reflect a German strategy aimed at leading the EU through this crisis.
"Instead, they are largely a response to domestic political imperatives."
"Berlin is consumed not with the question of what Europe might need in this historical situation, and what Germany’s role should be, but with fear – of the conservative and tabloid press, of further losses in state elections, and of the possibility that the German constitutional court will intervene and overturn the existing programs to contain the euro crisis."
Merkel now feels the fatal consequences of her “leadership without leading” approach.
One cannot shake the impression that the European soul of this government is devoured by angst.
"As for Germany’s ability to assert itself, there is not much evidence of it, despite the vigorous rhetoric."
"At the latest meeting of the European Council of Ministers, Germany’s “Iron Chancellor” hobbled home."
"It was French President Nicolas Sarkozy who, in the run-up to the last EU summit, called a halt to Merkel’s attempt to introduce an automatic response to member states that violate the stability criteria."
"Her second sweeping proposal, the withdrawal of voting rights in the Council, was abandoned at the Council’s recent meeting in Brussels."
"In fact, Merkel’s “triumph” consisted of nothing more than a Council promise to “review” a change to the Lisbon Treaty – albeit a change below the level that might make referendums necessary."
In simple language: forget about any punishment or automatic trigger mechanisms that might affect a country’s sovereignty.
"What remains of the effort to prevent a repeat of the crisis are tightened EU controls on national budgets and, regarding the treaty change to be considered, the continuation of the rescue package (which previously was due to expire in 2013), probably under a different name."
That is not much of a victory for Merkel.
"So, as Germans once again see their “Iron Chancellor” deliver butter-soft results, they are increasingly likely to trust those who warn that the government is being tricked into a “transfer union” that uses German money to finance handouts for fiscally lax EU members."
"Disagreement with this criticism is difficult, because the German federal system itself relies on transfers."
"The more the EU is forced by Germany to become a union rooted in “stability,” the more pressing it will become for eurozone countries that cannot conform to the new, stricter rules to receive some sort of financial compensation."
"It is, after all, unrealistic to assume that all members can profit to the same extent from this hard-line approach; that is not achievable even among the 16 federal German states."
"With Merkel’s active help, the eurozone is (in effect) moving towards becoming a transfer union: the stricter the new rules and the larger the interest-rate spreads among eurozone countries, the faster that will happen."
"At home, though, Merkel fears this debate like no other – a debate that the financial markets and the crisis in many European countries will ensure cannot be avoided."
Faintheartedness comes at a price.
Angela Merkel’s Vision Thing
"CAMBRIDGE – As Europe struggles to save the euro, the chorus of complaints about weak leadership in the world’s major economies grows louder."
"Many have singled out German Chancellor Angela Merkel for failing to promote a vision of Europe similar to that of her predecessor and mentor, Helmut Kohl."
Are the critics right?
Part of what effective leaders do is communicate a vision that gives meaning to policies and inspires others to support these policies (and those who propose them).
It is one of the ways in which leaders help to create shared objectives and energize common action.
"Usually, such a vision provides a scenario for the future that is meant to encourage change, though it may also portray the status quo – or the past – as attractive, thereby encouraging resistance to change."
"Either way, without a vision, it is difficult to lead others anywhere."
"Frederick Smith, CEO of Federal Express, has argued that “the primary task of leadership is to communicate the vision and values of an organization.”"
But one must be cautious about visions.
"Sometimes leaders think that vision can solve most of their problems, but the wrong vision – or an overly ambitious vision – can do damage."
George H.W. Bush was faulted (and faulted himself) for not having what he called “the vision thing.”
"When pressed by his staff to speak more boldly and expansively, he replied, “It’s just not me.”"
"After the shock of the September 2001 terrorist attacks, his son, George W. Bush, developed a far more ambitious vision."
"As one former adviser put it, he was “irresistibly drawn to Big Ideas like bringing democracy to the Middle East, Big Ideas that stood in sharp contrast to the prudent small ball played by his father.”"
Yet the elder Bush turned out to have had the better foreign policy.
Some aspiring leaders think that they must proclaim a vision that overawes their followers.
"In practice, however, a successful vision often arises from the needs of the group, which are then formulated and articulated by the leader."
"The vision that Martin Luther King, Jr., expressed in his “I Have a Dream” speech, for example, was deeply rooted not only in America’s professed values of equality and inclusion, but also in African-Americans’ experience of subordination and exclusion."
"At the same time, the pressure to articulate a vision can get a leader into difficulty."
"As one university president put it: “Everyone asks, ‘What’s your vision?’"
But you offend many people and get into trouble by answering too quickly.
"The smart response at the beginning is, ‘What do you think?’ and then listen before you articulate your vision.”"
A successful vision has to be attractive to various circles of followers and stakeholders.
"What plays well with one group may not sit well with another. And, to be sustainable, a successful vision must also be an effective diagnosis of the situation that a group faces."
Leaders must get the question right before proposing answers.
"To choose goals and articulate them in a vision, they need not only to solicit input from their followers, but also to understand the context of their choices."
They must be able to assess reality accurately.
The boldness of a vision varies with the type of leadership involved.
Leaders of social movements can call forth larger visions than public officials can.
"A movement leader can promote a vision that is miles ahead of his followers, while a prime minister with multiple objectives and responsibilities must maintain a continuous dialogue with the public, which keeps him or her from moving too far ahead of citizens."
"After former US Vice President Al Gore lost his bid for the presidency in 2000, he became a leader of the social movement to combat global climate change, and his style changed from pragmatic to inspirational and prophetic."
"Analysts judge a government leader’s vision in terms of whether it creates a sensible balance between realism and risk, and whether it balances objectives with capabilities."
"Anyone can produce a wish list, but effective visions combine inspiration with feasibility."
"Critics of former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, for example, acknowledged that his ability to articulate a vision was one of his great strengths as a leader, but complained about his lack of attention to detail."
"Similarly, two twentieth-century US presidents, Woodrow Wilson and George W. Bush, were good at articulating an ambitious foreign-policy vision, but were poor at refining and reshaping their vision when they encountered implementation challenges."
"Both promoted democracy, but both did so in a manner that generated a backlash against democracy promotion."
"Of course, prudence is not enough."
"Sometimes leaders need to stretch the boundaries of realism to inspire their followers and call forth extra effort, as Winston Churchill did in Great Britain in 1940. But, without a degree of prudence based upon comprehension of the context, visions turn from grand to grandiose and undercut the values that they seek to promote."
"Like Franklin Roosevelt, who acted very cautiously in trying to persuade American opinion to abandon isolationism in the 1930’s, Merkel has proceeded cautiously on saving the euro."
She faced public skepticism about using German funds to bail out the Greek economy.
"Her coalition was divided on the issue, and her party lost state elections."
"If she had acted more boldly, she might have lost even more support, but the steps that she agreed to remained insufficient to reassure markets."
"At the end of October, however, she finally articulated a vision of the future of Europe that persuaded the German Bundestag to agree to a package of measures to save the euro."
Whether she waited too long – and whether her vision will prove convincing – will be determined in the coming months.
PISA’s Promise
"PARIS – By assessing the capabilities and knowledge of students in the highest-performing and most rapidly improving education systems, the OECD’s Program for International Student Assessment provides valuable options for reform and information on how to achieve it."
"PISA brings together policymakers, educators, and researchers from around the world to discuss what knowledge students need to become successful and responsible citizens in today’s world, and how to develop more effective, inclusive education systems."
"Some claim that the PISA results are based on too wide a range of factors to be relevant, while others point out the challenges inherent in testing students in various languages and with different cultural backgrounds."
"Of course, comparing education across countries is not easy, but PISA remains the most useful tool yet developed for policymakers attempting to improve their national education systems."
"Before PISA, many governments claimed that they oversaw the world’s most successful education systems, and insisted that they had already taken the steps needed to address any shortcomings."
"By exposing weaknesses in a particular country’s system, PISA assessments help to ensure that policymakers recognize – and, it is hoped, address – remaining deficiencies."
"The sense of accountability that PISA fosters among governments and education ministers has helped to spur them into action. They increasingly turn to one another to learn how to apply innovations in curricula, pedagogy, and digital resources; how to offer personalized learning experiences that maximize every student’s chances of success; and how to cope with diversity in the classroom."
"The OECD established PISA as a global assessment, because in today’s globalized world students must be able to collaborate with people from diverse backgrounds and appreciate different ideas, perspectives, and values."
"To give students the best possible chance to succeed, education must prepare them to handle issues that transcend national boundaries."
"But PISA’s most important outcomes lie at the national level, because it inspires innovation and broadens educational perspectives within countries."
"Education systems as diverse as those in Finland, Japan, China, and Canada – which seldom registered on policymakers’ radars before – have become global reference points for excellence in education, helping other countries to design effective reforms."
"When Brazil emerged as the lowest-performing education system in the first PISA assessment, released in 2000, many people rightly questioned the fairness of comparing an emerging economy to advanced countries like Finland and Japan."
"But Brazil rose to the challenge, making massive investments in improving the quality of teaching."
The country now boasts one of the world’s most rapidly improving education systems.
"Germany also featured in PISA 2000, recording below-average performance and large social inequalities in education – an outcome that stunned Germans and initiated a months-long public debate."
"Spurred into action, the government launched initiatives to support disadvantaged and immigrant students, and made the notion of early childhood education a driving force in German education policy."
"Today, PISA reports confirm that the quality and fairness of Germany’s education system have improved considerably."
"Even in the world’s best-performing education systems, PISA helps to pinpoint areas for improvement."
"For example, PISA assessments have revealed that, while Japanese students excel at reproducing what they have learned, they often struggle when asked to extrapolate from that knowledge and apply it creatively."
"The effort that this has inspired to create more innovative learning environments was apparent last April, during a visit to the Tohoku schools destroyed by the 2011 tsunami."
"This experience offers yet another lesson: even in cases where social and cultural factors seem to be the main force shaping a country’s education style, improvements are possible."
Countries like Japan do not have to change their cultures to address their educational shortcomings; they simply have to adjust their policies and practices.
Creating a global platform for collaboration in education research and innovation has been the PISA initiative’s aspiration from its conception in the late 1990s.
"Since then, policymakers, researchers, and experts have built the world’s largest professional network dedicated to the development of robust, reliable, and internationally comparable information on student learning outcomes."
"At the same time, PISA measures students’ social and emotional skills and attitudes toward learning, as well as educational equity and parental support – all of which provides indispensable context for understanding scores on international assessments."
"Of course, assessments do not cover every important skill or attitude."
"But there is convincing evidence that the knowledge and skills that the PISA system assesses are essential to students’ future success, and the OECD works continuously to broaden the range of cognitive and social skills that PISA measures."
PISA has already prompted important advances in education worldwide.
"The OECD will continue to work with the 80 participating countries to develop the program further, so that it can continue to help policymakers and educators design and implement better education policies – and give their citizens access to the tools that they need to build better lives."
An Honest Man?
"In his gushing account of President George W. Bush, the former presidential speechwriter David Frum tells us that his boss ""scorned the petty untruths of the politician."""
"We learn, for example, that when asked to prepare a radio broadcast for the following day, he would begin reading, ""Today I am in California"" and quickly break off, saying with exasperation, ""But I'm not in California."""
"Frum thought this a bit pedantic, but concluded that it was emblematic of the President's character and that ""the country could trust the Bush administration not to cheat and not to lie."""
How wrong Frum now seems.
"Bush may naively consider it lying, and therefore wrong, to say that he is in California when he is recording a speech in Washington."
But he fails to see anything gravely wrong about misleading his country and the world concerning Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
"As we have seen, the White House built its case for war on a highly selective dossier of evidence, and Bush made statements about Iraq's attempt to purchase uranium from Africa that he and his staff knew to be highly doubtful, if not false."
"When questions were raised about how the statement about uranium was allowed to remain in Bush's State of the Union address, both National Security Advisor Condoleeza Rice and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld argued that it was not a lie."
"Their reasoning indicates that they, like the President, have a childishly literal notion of what it is to lie."
"Bush's actual words were these: ""The British government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa."""
"Bush's statement took this form because the CIA objected to the original version, which flatly stated that Saddam Hussein had sought to buy uranium from Africa."
The White House staff member who discussed it with the CIA then suggested changing the sentence so that it stated that the British reported that Saddam Hussein had
"This was literally true, because the British had reported that."
"It was nevertheless misleading, for the CIA had informed the British that their information was not reliable."
The fact that Bush only referred to a British statement is the basis for Rice and Rumsfeld's defense of it.
"Rice said that ""the statement that [Bush] made was indeed accurate."
"The British government did say that."""
"Rumsfeld said that Bush's statement was ""technically accurate."""
"In fact, even on the most literal interpretation, Bush's statement was not accurate."
"Bush did not say merely that the British had ""reported"" that Iraq had sought to buy uranium from Africa, but that the British had ``learned'' this."
To say that someone has learned something is to endorse what they say they have learned as true.
Imagine that the British had said that Saddam Hussein was a peace-loving man about to bring democracy to his country.
Would Bush have said that the British had
"Quite apart from these weak attempts to justify Bush's statement as ""technically accurate,"" the more serious charge is that even if what Bush said really were technically accurate, it still would have been designed to mislead the world into thinking that Iraq had been trying to buy uranium in Africa."
Bush and his staff had good reason to believe that this was not true.
Bush's response to the issue after it became public shows him to be focused on the trivial and morally reckless about the essential.
A person who is morally sensitive to the seriousness of starting a war on the basis of misleading information would take appropriate steps.
"He would ensure that the American public knew how the error occurred, and that whoever was responsible for it suffered the usual consequences that befall senior officials who make what was--to put the best possible interpretation on it--a grave error of judgment."
But Bush did nothing of the sort.
"When the issue became public, Bush's response was to condemn his critics as ""revisionist historians"" and to evade questions about the credibility of the information he had provided by asserting that the removal of Saddam was a good outcome."
"Then he said that the CIA had cleared his speech, as if that absolved him of all responsibility."
"After CIA Director George Tenet took responsibility for the inclusion of the misleading material, Bush said that he ""absolutely"" had confidence in Tenet and the CIA, and that he considered the matter closed."
Belief in Bush's honesty led many voters to prefer him to Albert Gore in the 2000 presidential election.
"Among voters who rated ""honesty"" as an important factor influencing their choice of candidate, 80% said that they voted for Bush."
"These voters were disgusted with Clinton, not only for his sexual relationship with White House intern Monica Lewinsky, but for lying about it."
"That Clinton did lie about his sexual activities is clear, and he was wrong to do so."
But his lies did not lead his country into a war that has cost thousands of lives.
Bush's excessively literal interpretation of the requirements of honesty conceals a deeper dishonesty whose consequences have been far more morally serious.
A Nice Mess in Nice
"LONDON: A hundred years ago, the humorous English magazine Punch carried a cartoon which depicted a young and nervous curate eating breakfast with his bishop."
"He was eating a boiled egg, and clearly not enjoying it."
"The bishop enquired: “I say - is your egg all right?” And the curate replies: “My Lord, it is excellent in parts.”"
"The cartoon caught the English fancy, and created a catch-phrase still in use today, although it is usually misunderstood and misused."
"Someone may say: “It’s a bit of a curate’s egg”, when he means that something is a mixture of good and bad."
"But of course the point of the original joke was that the curate was just being polite: an egg is either good or bad, and his was bad."
This week’s European Summit at Nice (December 7-9) looks like being a curate’s egg.
"The question is, will it be bad all through and a failure? Or will it be “excellent in parts”?"
The probable answer is: both.
It will almost certainly fail to achieve its immediate objectives; but it may open the door to serious progress afterwards.
"The ostensible purpose of the summit is to make those changes in the European Union’s decision-making machinery that would enable it to cope with the admission of at least 12 new members, mainly from Central and Eastern Europe."
"Everyone knows that these changes ought to be radical, even semi-federal."
"At the very least, the coming enlargement will call for much more majority voting in the Council of Ministers, if the Union is not be paralyzed by 27 member states and 27 national vetoes."
But most member states are unwilling to contemplate anything that far-reaching.
"The host French, who currently hold the EU Presidency, have listed 50 policy areas where majority voting might be possible."
"Every country, however, has special sensitivities: the Germans are unwilling to be outvoted on immigration; the French are unwilling to be outvoted on trade in services; the British are unwilling to be outvoted on taxation."
"The cumulative result of all these national objections, is that the Nice summit is likely to see only a modest increase in the potential for majority voting, much smaller than enlargement requires."
A similar reluctance will dominate the rest of the immediate institutional agenda.
"In principle, the Commission ought to be slimmed down after enlargement, with fewer Commissioners than member states."
"Equally, big member states ought to have more votes in the Council of Ministers, to reflect their greater populations."
"Small member states do not like either proposition, because they would lose Commissioners and votes."
"On both issues, expect a serious tug-of-war, and any decisions are likely to be half-hearted, or in practice postponed."
"Yet, the 15 member states may compensate for their collective failure of nerve by opening up easier options for flexible or multi-speed integration."
"This might be a way round the majority voting dilemma, since it would allow groups of member states to cooperate together in particular areas, without waiting for the unanimous agreement of all partners."
"Whether this would really be a desirable procedure is hotly debated; but the fact is that multi-speed integration already exists in the sense that Britain and Denmark are not now, and may never be, members of the euro."
"If these scraps were to be the sum total of the Nice summit, it will prove unsatisfactory, even a failure."
"But the real significance of the meeting may turn out to be, not the limited decisions which the heads of government are able and willing to take this time round, but the opening up, virtually for the first time, of serious discussion about the future direction of the European Union."
One thing that will happen at Nice will be the formal adoption of a Charter of Fundamental Rights.
"In its present form, this document recapitulates all kinds of rights which EU citizens already enjoy under existing laws; it is not intended to confer any new rights, and it cannot be enforced in the European Court of Justice."
"In other words, it is a public relations conjuring trick, designed to make the EU seem more attractive, without actually conferring any real benefits."
"Even as a conjuring trick, the Charter could be influential."
"For example, Article 2 reads: “Everyone has the right to life."
"No one shall be condemned to the death penalty, or executed.”"
"It seems evident that this principle will be effectively binding on all member states, and all candidates for membership."
"The question at Nice will be whether the Charter should be incorporated into the EU Treaties, and thus given the force of law."
"Another similar question at Nice will be whether the time has come to simplify the EU Treaties, which are now a confusing jumble of general principles and difficult detail."
"Simplification might be intended, at the start, as another conjuring trick: to make the Treaties more comprehensible to voters without changing anything in law."
"But it could also become the first, essential step on the road to the drafting of a European constitution."
An IMF We Can Love?
CAMBRIDGE – What a difference the crisis has made for the International Monetary Fund.
"It was just a few months ago that this important but unloved institution, a landmark of post-war global economic arrangements, seemed destined to irrelevance."
"The IMF has long been a whipping boy for both left and right – the former because of the Fund’s emphasis on fiscal rectitude and economic orthodoxy, and the latter because of its role in bailing out indebted nations."
"Developing nations grudgingly took its advice, while advanced nations, not needing the money, ignored it."
"In a world where private capital flows dwarf the resources at its disposal, the IMF had come to seem an anachronism."
"And, when some of the IMF’s largest debtors (Brazil and Argentina) began to prepay their debts a few years ago with no new borrowers in sight, it looked like the final nail in the coffin had been struck."
"The IMF seemed condemned to run out of income, in addition to losing its raison d’être ."
"It shrank its budgets and began to downsize, and, while it was handed some new responsibilities in the meantime – surveillance over “currency manipulation,” in particular – its deliberations proved largely irrelevant."
But the crisis has invigorated the IMF.
"Under its capable managing director, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the Fund has been one of the few official agencies ahead of – instead of behind – the curve."
It moved quickly to establish a fast-disbursing emergency line of credit for countries with “reasonable” policies.
"It ardently championed global fiscal stimulus on the order of 2% of world GNP – a position that is all the more remarkable in view of its traditional conservatism on all fiscal matters. And, in the run-up to the G-20 summit in London, it thoroughly overhauled its lending policies, de-emphasizing traditional conditionality and making it easier for countries to qualify for loans."
"Even more significantly, the IMF has emerged from the London meeting with substantially greater resources, as well as new responsibilities."
"The G-20 promised to triple the Fund’s lending capacity (from $250 billion to $750 billion), issue $250 billion of new Special Drawing Rights (a reserve asset made up of a basket of major currencies), and permit the Fund to borrow in capital markets (which it has never done) if necessary."
The IMF was also designated as one of two lead agencies – along with an expanded Financial Stability Forum (now renamed the Financial Stability Board) – charged with providing early warning of macroeconomic and financial risks and issuing the requisite policy recommendations.
Another piece of good news is that the Europeans have now given up their claim on naming the IMF’s managing director (as have the Americans their corresponding claim on the World Bank presidency).
"These senior officials are henceforth to be selected “through an open, transparent, and merit-based selection process.”"
"This will provide for better governance (although Strauss-Kahn’s leadership has been exemplary), and will enhance both institutions’ legitimacy in the eyes of developing nations."
So the IMF now finds itself at the center of the economic universe once again.
How will it choose to deploy its newfound power?
"The greatest risk is that it will once again over-reach and over-play its hand. That is what happened in the second half of the 1990’s, as the IMF began to preach capital-account liberalization, applied over-stringent fiscal remedies during the Asian financial crisis, and single-handedly tried to reshape Asian economies."
"The institution has since acknowledged its errors in all these areas. But it remains to be seen if the lessons have been fully internalized, and whether we will have a kinder, gentler IMF in lieu of a rigid, doctrinaire one."
One encouraging fact is that developing countries will almost certainly get a larger say in how the Fund is run. This will ensure that poorer nations’ views receive a more sympathetic hearing in the future.
But simply giving developing nations greater voting power will make little difference if the IMF’s organizational culture is not changed as well.
"The Fund is staffed by a large number of smart economists, who lack much connection to (and appreciation for) the institutional realities of the countries on which they work."
"Their professional expertise is validated by the quality of their advanced degrees, rather than by their achievements in practical policymaking."
"This breeds arrogance and a sense of smug superiority over their counterparts – policymakers who must balance multiple, complicated agendas."
"Countering this will require proactive efforts by the IMF’s top leadership in recruitment, staffing, and promotion."
One option would be to increase substantially the number of mid-career recruits with actual practical experience in developing countries.
This would make the IMF staff more cognizant of the value of local knowledge relative to theoretical expertise.
"Another strategy would be to relocate some of the staff, including those in functional departments, to “regional offices” in the field. This move would likely face considerable resistance from staff who have gotten used to the perks of Washington, DC."
"But there is no better way to appreciate the role of context than to live in it. The World Bank, which engaged in a similar decentralization a while back, has become better at serving its clients as a result (without facing difficulties in recruiting top talent)."
This is an important moment for the IMF.
The international community is putting great store in the Fund’s judgment and performance. The Fund will require internal reforms to earn that trust fully.
Leveling the Afghan Playing Field
"NEW YORK – Afghanistan’s security and political situation remains plagued by uncertainty, stemming from the withdrawal of United States and NATO combat troops, the upcoming presidential election, and the stalled peace negotiations with the Taliban."
"Recognizing that continued economic insecurity will exacerbate this perilous situation, the government has announced a new package of economic incentives aimed at attracting foreign direct investment."
"The package includes the provision of land to industrialists at dramatically reduced prices, tax exemptions of up to seven years for factory owners, and low-interest loans of up to ten years for farmers."
"Such incentives are targeted at foreign investors and the local elite, with the aim of stopping or even reversing capital flight."
But the new measures ultimately amount to more of the same: a fragmented policy approach that will prove inadequate to solve Afghanistan’s fundamental economic problems.
"In the early stages of the post-war transition, FDI increased rapidly, rising from 1.2% of GDP in 2002 to a peak of 4.3% of GDP in 2005."
"Most of these inflows were directed toward the construction and services sectors – the main drivers of GDP growth – and aimed to satisfy international demand, both civilian and military."
"But, in 2006-2007, FDI levels began to fall, owing to a sharply deteriorating security situation, a continued lack of electricity and adequate infrastructure, a shortage of skilled labor, inadequate legal and regulatory systems, inefficient bureaucratic procedures, and the need to renew companies’ licenses annually."
"Land grabs, chronic corruption, impunity, the inability to enforce contracts, and the fragmentation and ineffectiveness of aid deterred foreign and domestic investment further."
"As a result, FDI collapsed to less than 0.5% of GDP annually in 2011-2012."
"Moreover, in the effort to develop two of the world’s largest mines, investors’ greed prevailed over their security and business-climate concerns."
"In 2007, the Metallurgical Corporation of China won the concession for the Aynak copper deposit in Logar Province."
"In 2011, a group of Indian state and private companies won the concession for the Hajigak iron-ore deposit in Bamyan Province."
"But, despite these projects’ reported billion-dollar price tags and high expectations, the investments have catalyzed little progress, owing partly to security issues."
"Worse, the mines’ displacement of residents, underpayment of workers, and environmental damage have generated resentment in local communities, which is likely to grow in the future."
"After all, the granting of mineral resources to foreigners reduces – and could even eliminate – their benefits for local people."
"As it stands, Afghanistan’s economy is a house of cards."
"Aid levels are comparable to GDP, with donors covering roughly two-thirds of government expenditure and the entire current-account deficit, which amounts to 40% of GDP."
But aid is falling and expected to drop sharply after 2014.
"Rather than continuing to pursue piecemeal measures like those that it has just approved, the government needs to implement an integrated and targeted strategy for the reactivation of investment, employment, and trade."
"Indeed, a drastic shift in policy is essential to avoid economic collapse."
"In order to reduce the risks associated with investing in Afghanistan, the government must create a system that benefits local communities and foreign investors alike."
This can be achieved with a strategy based on two distinct but mutually beneficial “reconstruction zones”: an export-oriented zone (ERZ) and a local-production zone (LRZ).
"The ERZ, focused exclusively on producing goods for export, would provide tax incentives, basic infrastructure and services, security, and a stable legal framework to investors."
"In exchange, investors would commit to train local workers, create employment by purchasing local inputs and services, improve corporate practices and local providers’ standards, facilitate technology transfers, and establish links with local technical schools and universities."
"The LRZ would enable local people to improve their livelihoods though the production of agricultural goods, the efficient delivery of services, and light manufacturing."
"Such a scheme would also help to bolster gender equality by providing a level playing field for all Afghans in terms of security, social services, infrastructure, credit, and inputs (such as seeds, fertilizers, and agricultural machinery)."
"Moreover, it would boost food supplies and reduce Afghanistan’s exorbitant dependence on imports."
"By focusing exclusively on foreigners and domestic elites for investment, Afghanistan is missing out on the vast potential of micro-entrepreneurs and small businesses to contribute to steady GDP growth."
Achieving long-overdue peace and stability will be impossible without them.
An Inconvenient Peace Prize
This year’s Nobel Peace Prize justly rewards the thousands of scientists of the United Nations Climate Change Panel (the IPCC).
"These scientists are engaged in excellent, painstaking work that establishes exactly what the world should expect from climate change."
"The other award winner, former US Vice President Al Gore, has spent much more time telling us what to fear."
"While the IPCC’s estimates and conclusions are grounded in careful study, Gore doesn’t seem to be similarly restrained."
Gore told the world in his Academy Award-winning movie (recently labeled “one-sided” and containing “scientific errors” by a British judge) to expect 20-foot sea-level rises over this century.
"He ignores the findings of his Nobel co-winners, the IPCC, who conclude that sea levels will rise between only a half-foot and two feet over this century, with their best expectation being about one foot. That’s similar to what the world experienced over the past 150 years."
"Likewise, Gore agonizes over the accelerated melting of ice in Greenland and what it means for the planet, but overlooks the IPCC’s conclusion that, if sustained, the current rate of melting would add just three inches to the sea level rise by the end of the century."
Gore also takes no notice of research showing that Greenland’s temperatures were higher in 1941 than they are today.
Gore also frets about the future of polar bears.
He claims they are drowning as their icy habitat disappears.
"However, the only scientific study showing any such thing indicates that four polar bears drowned because of a storm."
The politician-turned-movie maker loses sleep over a predicted rise in heat-related deaths.
"There’s another side of the story that’s inconvenient to mention: rising temperatures will reduce the number of cold spells, which are a much bigger killer than heat."
"The best study shows that by 2050, heat will claim 400,000 more lives, but 1.8 million fewer will die because of cold."
"Indeed, according to the first complete survey of the economic effects of climate change for the world, global warming will actually save lives."
The IPCC has magnanimously declared that it would have been happy if Gore had received the Nobel Peace prize alone.
"I am glad that he did not, and that the IPCC’s work has rightfully been acknowledged."
Gore has helped the world to worry.
"Unfortunately, our attention is diverted from where it matters."
Climate change is not the only problem facing the globe.
Our blinkered focus on it – to the detriment of other planetary challenges – will only be heightened by the attention generated by Gore’s Nobel Peace Prize.
"Gore concentrates above all else on his call for world leaders to cut CO2 emissions, yet there are other policies that would do much more for the planet."
"Over the coming century, developing nations will be increasingly dependent on food imports from developed countries."
"This is not primarily a result of global warming, but a consequence of more people and less arable land in the developing world."
The number of hungry people depends much less on climate than on demographics and income.
Extremely expensive cuts in carbon emissions could mean more malnourished people.
"If our goal is to fight malnutrition, policies like getting nutrients to those who need them are 5,000 times more effective at saving lives than spending billions of dollars cutting carbon emissions."
"Likewise, global warming will probably slightly increase malaria, but CO2 reductions will be far less effective at fighting this disease than mosquito nets and medication, which can cheaply save 850,000 lives every year."
"By contrast, the expensive Kyoto Protocol will prevent just 1,400 deaths from malaria each year."
"While we worry about the far-off effects of climate change, we do nothing to deal with issues facing the planet today."
"This year, malnutrition will kill almost four million people."
Three million lives will be lost to HIV/AIDS.
Two and a half million people will die because of indoor and outdoor air pollution.
A lack of micronutrients and clean drinking water will claim two million lives each.
"With attention and money in scarce supply, what matters is that we first tackle the problems with the best solutions, doing the most good throughout the century."
"If we focus on solving today’s problems, we will leave communities strengthened, economies more vibrant, and infrastructures more robust."
This will enable these societies to deal much better with future problems – including global warming.
Committing to massive cuts in carbon emissions will leave future generations poorer and less able to adapt to challenges.
Gore has an unshakable faith that climate change is the biggest challenge facing the world.
"To be fair, he deserves some form of recognition for his resolute passion."
"However, the contrast between this year’s Nobel winners could not be sharper."
The IPCC engages in meticulous research where facts rule over everything else.
Gore has a very different approach.
An India-China Axis?
Is a new alignment between India and China rising to balance America’s global power?
"Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao just completed a four-day visit to India during which 11 agreements were signed, including a comprehensive five-year strategic cooperation pact."
"In addition, Wen announced that China would support India’s bid for a permanent seat on an expanded UN Security Council, and opposed the inclusion of Japan, which the United States supports for a Council seat."
"With over a third of the world’s population and two of the globe’s highest economic growth rates, an alliance between China and India could be a serious factor in world politics."
While both are developing countries – many of whose people remain impoverished – they also boast impressive capabilities in information age technologies both for civilian and military purposes.
"As Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh put it during Wen’s visit, “India and China can together reshape the world order.”"
The two countries’ recent rapprochement marks a huge change from the hostility that bedeviled their relations following their 1962 war over a disputed border in the Himalayas.
"When I first visited India as an American government official in the late 1970’s, I was struck by my Indian hosts’ fixation on gaining equal status with China."
"In 1998, when India tested its nuclear weapons, the defense minister referred to China, and then Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee spoke of China as India’s number one enemy."
"By contrast, on more recent visits to India, I have found my hosts referring to the need to learn from China."
"Trade between the two giants has grown from $100 million in 1994 to nearly $14 billion last year, and India’s minister of commerce and industry has predicted that it will double by this decade’s end."
One agreement signed during Wen’s visit was a new set of guiding principles on how to settle boundary disputes between the two countries.
"While improved relations and diminished prospects for conflict are welcome, relations between India and China are more complex than they appear at first."
"Not long before the visit of the Chinese premier, India hosted US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice."
"Ever since President Bill Clinton’s visit to India, but especially under President George W. Bush, the US has moved from relative indifference to India to the development of a strong strategic relationship."
"This new approach might have seemed threatened by Al Qaeda’s attacks on America, which led to a strengthening of US relations with Pakistan’s General Parvez Musharaff. But the US reassured India that they faced a common threat from transnational terrorism, and that the old Cold War pairings of India and Pakistan were outdated."
"Secretary Rice made this plain during her March visit, stressing the importance of a strategic relationship, including a willingness to consider trade in high technology, nuclear energy, and co-production of fighter aircraft such as F-16’s and F-18’s."
"Shortly after Rice’s visit, the US announced that it would honor a long-standing promise to sell F-16’s to Pakistan."
"While the announcement incited Indian protests, they were relatively muted compared to the past."
"One reason is that the State Department also issued a statement that America would help India to become a major world power in the twenty-first century, involving both a strategic and economic dialogue."
Several factors underpin this new American attitude toward India.
"Rhetoric about “the world’s two largest democracies” is not new, but it fits with the Bush administration’s new emphasis on promoting democracy."
"The increasing role of the Indian diaspora in the US, particularly in the information industries, also had an influence, as has the rise in bilateral trade accompanying India’s surging economic growth."
Equally important are strategic concerns about transnational terrorism and the rise of Chinese power.
The rise of China is a major factor in the politics of the twenty-first century.
"China has tripled the size of its economy in the past two decades, and has been increasing its military strength."
"While both India and the US seek trade and good relations with China, both are aware – and wary – of China’s growing strength."
"Thus, both seek to hedge their bets, and what better way to do so than by improving their strategic relationship?"
"Neither country aims to restrain China in the way the “containment” strategy aimed at an aggressive Soviet Union during the Cold War, but both want to create an international structure that does not tempt China to throw its weight around."
"India has a 3,000-kilometer border with China, a 2,000-kilometer border with Pakistan (which has been the beneficiary of Chinese military and nuclear assistance), and growing concerns about the security of sea routes in the Indian Ocean over which oil and other trade move."
"As one Indian strategist put it to me during a recent visit, “By 2030, we envisage the US, China, and India as the three largest powers in world politics."
"We don’t want a China- or a US-dominated world, but if we had to choose, it would be easier for us to live with the latter.”"
"So, while improvement in India-China relations is welcome, it is unlikely to herald the beginning of an India-China alliance against the US. Rather, it more likely represents another move in India’s age-old tradition of managing regional balances of power."
An India-Pakistan Diplomatic Test Match
"LAHORE – In 2005, during a visit to Islamabad, I met Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf and told him of a conversation I had had with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India."
"The Indian leader, whom I have known for years, had said that he wanted better relations with Pakistan as one his legacies."
Musharraf’s response was interesting.
"He said he had the same aspiration, but that it would need effort from both sides to move things along."
“I have invited Manmohan a half-dozen times to visit Pakistan.
"I have also offered to take him to his village near Chakwal, a few miles south of Islamabad, where he was born."
"But he continues to demur,” he told me."
"I repeated the conversation to Singh, who explained that in a democracy such as India, a great deal of work needs to be done with the members of the coalition and the senior bureaucracy before the prime minister can travel to Pakistan."
“Musharraf is a military leader; he needs only to pack his bags and head this way.”
"Musharraf did head that way a few months later, when he forced an invitation out of Singh to watch a cricket match between the two sides in New Delhi in 2005."
It took the Indian government some time to formulate an answer to Musharraf’s request for a visit.
"When it came, it carried Singh’s characteristic warmth."
"At the end of a speech in the Lok Sabah, the lower house of India’s parliament, Singh issued his formal invitation."
"“How nice it would be to conduct our affairs in this august House with the same spirit of sportsmanship that our cricketers exhibit on the playing fields of the sub-continent,” he said."
“I am happy to inform the honorable members of this House that I have decided to invite President Musharraf to come to India to watch the cricket match between our two teams.
It is my earnest desire that the people in our neighborly countries and their leaders should feel free to visit each other whenever they wish to do so.
"Be it to watch a cricket match; be it do some shopping; be it to meet friends and families – India is proud to be an open society, an open economy."
I do hope that President Musharraf and his family will enjoy their visit to our country.”
"The prime minister’s statement was received with cheers, not the jeers that some of his aides had feared."
Musharraf went to Ferozeshah Kotala cricket ground in Delhi and saw his team win the match.
"He and Singh also found time during the game to talk about bilateral relations, and agreed to launch what came to be called the “composite dialogue,” covering eight contentious issues that had soured ties for so long."
"Three years later, a Pakistan-based terrorist group killed more than 160 people in Mumbai, India’s financial capital – and, with them, the diplomatic opening initiated by cricket."
"Once again, however, cricket has revived dialogue between the sub-continent’s two nuclear-armed rivals."
"This time, the initiative came from Singh, who invited his Pakistani counterpart, Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani, to visit Mohali, near New Delhi, to watch the two countries play the semi-final in the Cricket World Cup."
"The match was played on March 30, with Pakistan losing narrowly."
"On the political side, however, the two countries were not evenly matched."
"Of the troika that currently governs Pakistan – the president, the prime minister, and the chief of staff of the army – it is the prime minister who carries the least amount of authority."
"It was Gilani who sat next to Singh to watch the game; but, ultimately, process, rather than protocol, will determine how bilateral relations move forward."
"After the match, Singh said that “India and Pakistan should be working together to find cooperative solutions and need permanent reconciliation to live together in dignity and honor."
We should put our ancient animosities behind us to attend to the problems our two nations face.”
"Gilani expressed the same sentiment: “We need to focus on dealing with our common enemies – inflation, poverty, hunger, disease, and unemployment – for the prosperity of the two countries.”"
There have been indications of a gradual thaw.
"Senior officials from the ministries of commerce, defense, and foreign affairs will meet in the next two months followed by a meeting of the foreign ministers."
"Gilani invited Singh to visit Pakistan, an invitation that “will be considered carefully,” according to Indian Foreign Secretary Nirupama Rao."
"And she spoke of a new environment: “Today, it is the Mohali spirit that pervades our relationship."
This was an extremely positive and encouraging spirit that has been generated as a result of today’s meetings.”
"We have been here before, of course, only to see prospects for improved India-Pakistan relations snuffed out."
There are no guarantees that this time will be different.
"But, for both countries, hope dies last."
An Indirect Route to a Palestinian State?
RAMALLAH – Palestinians and Israelis have different and possibly contradictory expectations from the indirect negotiations that the United States has pushed both sides into beginning.
Israel was among the first parties to welcome the Arab League’s reluctant decision to back Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’s call for Arabs to give their blessing to the talks.
"It is clear that for Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s right-wing government, the start of indirect talks without freezing settlement activities in the West Bank and Jerusalem is a sort of victory."
"Just to remind the world of this, as the indirect talks were preparing to get off the ground, Israel’s government approved a decision to break ground on 112 housing units in a settlement south of Bethlehem, and 1600 new settlement units in East Jerusalem."
"For Palestinians, the return to talks, albeit indirect, is focused on one strategic issue: borders."
"The idea, a new one, aims at getting the Israelis and Palestinians to agree to the borders of the Palestinian state that both sides and the rest of the world have said is the way out of the decades-old conflict."
Palestinians want the areas occupied by Israel following the June 1967 War to be the territory of the Palestinian state.
"This fits with United Nations Security Council resolutions, among them Number 242, which stated the &quot;inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war.&quot;"
But a return to the 1967 borders would mean that large settlement blocks – as well as smaller settlements and East Jerusalem – would be part of the Palestinians state.
Few expect that to happen.
"Previous talks have included an allowance for land exchanges, which would permit Israel to keep many large settlement blocks by giving land inside Israel to the Palestinians."
The most likely swap would probably involve territory to create a West Bank-Gaza land corridor.
Jerusalem will be much more difficult to demarcate.
Palestinians and Israelis have publicly said that they do not want a wall separating West and East Jerusalem.
"Among the various ideas in circulation, most incorporate former US President Bill Clinton’s call for Jerusalem’s Jewish communities to be part of Israel and the Arab communities to be part of Palestine."
"But this plan has been put to the test lately by right-wing Israelis’ forcible takeover of Palestinian properties in the heart of East Jerusalem’s Sheikh Jarah neighborhood. Hundreds of Israeli peace supporters, along with some international activists, have joined evicted Palestinians to protest the actions of these radical settlers, which have been supported by municipal and government officials."
"Unfortunately, therefore, the indirect negotiations now being launched are unlikely to produce any tangible result on the borders of the Palestinian state. Indeed, to expect such results by the proposed four-month deadline is highly implausible."
"Nevertheless, for both sides, the process can be as important as the results."
"For Israelis, these talks will relieve US and other international pressure, while at the same time providing some legitimacy to Netanyahu’s position of talking peace without giving up on settlements and Jerusalem. Many will say that this appearance of supporting peace without surrendering land has been Israel’s successful position for decades."
"For Palestinians however, this process is different from negotiations in the past. Stubbornly refusing to talk face to face while settlement activities are not completely frozen has focused attention on what many believe is the crux of Israel’s colonial occupation regime."
"For many Palestinians and Israelis, as well as for the international community, the shape and details of what would be a settlement acceptable to majorities on both sides is well known."
"By focusing on the need to reach agreements on borders within a short time period, Palestinians are saying that they do not see any need to negotiate gradual steps, preferring to agree on the final settlement first and then work back on issues of implementation."
Perhaps the most interesting new aspect in the upcoming indirect talks is what has been happening on the ground in the occupied territories.
Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayyad has been active in executing a strategic plan that is expected to lead to a
"The American negotiators who are planning to play an active role in the indirect talks, and will for the first time sit at the negotiating table if face-to-face talks do take place, have apparently promised the Palestinians that the US will point its finger at the party that dares to derail the negotiations."
Such a US declaration (if it declares Israel at fault) would give Palestinians the opportunity to declare the talks a failure and thus move toward a unilateral declaration of statehood in the hope that the world community will recognize such a state. Europe has already said that it would recognize such a unilateral declaration.
"In that case, the Americans would have a hard time refusing to recognize a Palestinian state that fits what the international community has said is the only acceptable solution to this intractable conflict."
An Inequality Tax
The economic booms in China and India have helped to reduce global inequality.
"Over the two last decades, masses of Indians and Chinese have closed the gap (in relative terms) with the rich world."
"But, at the same time, many of the world’s truly poor countries have fallen further behind (particularly in Africa, where developments are often described as catastrophic), and inequality within most countries has risen."
"Widening inequality has been recorded in the United States (starting with Ronald Reagan’s administration), the United Kingdom (starting with Margaret Thatcher), Russia during its privatization, and more recently in China and India."
These developments seem to add to global inequality.
"So, on balance, it seems that global inequality has been relatively stable during the last two decades."
Should anything be done about this?
Many think that no global action to fight economic inequality is necessary. They argue that only poverty reduction matters.
"In the words of Anne Krueger, the Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, “Poor people are desperate to improve their material conditions…rather than to march up the income distribution [ladder].”"
"Thus, even if the absolute income gap between an average American and an average African increases, why worry?"
"After all, such people argue, the average African would be a bit less poor."
But this assumes that our income relative to the income of others does not matter.
"On the contrary, psychological studies invariably show that people care not only about their absolute income, but also about where they stand in the social pyramid and whether their position is fair."
"In the past, a poor African might have looked at his compatriots and resented their wealth; now, both he and his better-off compatriots look at the rich world and resent the huge income gaps they see."
"The gaps are most obvious where people from different countries work together, as in many multinational companies."
An “expatriate” may be paid ten times more than local staff for the same job.
"A wage premium based solely on citizenship is grating. But even when people do not work together, globalization, by bringing the world to everyone’s living room (or hut), enables them to make much wider comparisons of their living standards."
"It erodes the relative security in which the rich world could shelter itself, as in a cocoon."
"Now, all can see these income differences."
This is why international action to address both global poverty and global inequality is needed.
"Global redistribution through taxes that would be levied by an international body may seem far-fetched today, but the logic of development that we are witnessing – particularly the move away from nation-states as the locus of sovereignty – suggests that it may eventually come to pass."
One such opportunity was missed in the early 1990’s.
"When Russia faced its worst crisis, aid was given to the corrupt Yeltsin regime."
But it should have been disbursed directly in cash to the most needy Russians: pensioners whose earnings plummeted due to inflation and economic contraction.
An international organization could have simply used the existing infrastructure of the Russian state to distribute cash grants to some 20 million pensioners – money that would have been much better targeted and spent than by giving the same amount to the government.
"If this had been done, Russians would have fondly remembered receiving cash aid from the international community rather than blaming it for transferring funds to corrupt leaders."
"But the same or a similar approach could be taken in many countries today, from Angola to Zimbabwe."
The approach is simple and powerful.
"It involves three steps: raise money from the globally rich, do not deal with governments, and transfers funds in cash to the poor."
Those who advocate leaving globalization exclusively in the hands of the private sector may resent the idea of vesting tax-raising authority in a global agency.
But they cannot fail to notice that the processes they support undercut their own position by rendering the wealth gap more obvious and the fairness of the actual global distribution more questionable.
They will ultimately realize that their self-interest lies in supporting some form of global action to deal with both poverty and inequality.
An Inflation Reality Check
"CAMBRIDGE – As inflation continues to soar everywhere, maybe the world’s central bankers need a jolt to awaken them from complacency."
How about holding one of their bi-monthly meetings in hyperinflationary Zimbabwe?
"It might not be comfortable, but it would be educational."
"According to Zimbabwe’s official statistical agency, inflation topped 66,000% in 2007, which looks more like Weimar Germany than modern-day Africa."
"While no one is quite certain how the government managed to estimate prices, given that there is virtually nothing for sale in the shops, most indicators suggest that Zimbabwe does have a good shot at breaking world records for inflation."
"Of course, curious as they might be, central bankers could decide that meeting in Harare would be too inconvenient and politically unpalatable."
"Fortunately, there are lots of other nice – albeit less spectacular – inflation destinations."
"Inflation in Russia, Vietnam, Argentina, and Venezuela is solidly in double digits, to name just a few possibilities."
"Indeed, except for deflation-ridden Japan, central bankers could meet just about anywhere and see high and rising inflation."
Chinese authorities are so worried by their country’s 7% inflation they are copying India and imposing price controls on food.
"Even the United States had inflation at 4% last year, though the Federal Reserve is somehow convinced that most people won’t notice."
"Many central bankers and economists argue that today’s rising global inflation is just a temporary aberration, driven by soaring prices for food, fuel, and other commodities."
"True, prices for many key commodities are up 25% to 50% since the start of the year."
"But if central bankers think that today’s inflation is simply the product of short-term resource scarcities as opposed to lax monetary policy, they are mistaken."
"The fact is that around most of the world, inflation – and eventually inflation expectations – will keep climbing unless central banks start tightening their monetary policies."
The US is now ground zero for global inflation.
"Faced with a vicious combination of collapsing housing prices and imploding credit markets, the Fed has been aggressively cutting interest rates to try to stave off a recession."
"But even if the Fed does not admit it in its forecasts, the price of this “insurance policy” will almost certainly be higher inflation down the road, and perhaps for several years."
"America’s inflation would be contained but for the fact that so many countries, from the Middle East to Asia, effectively tie their currencies to the dollar."
"Others, such as Russia and Argentina, do not literally peg to the dollar but nevertheless try to smooth movements."
"As a result, whenever the Fed cuts interest rates, it puts pressure on the whole “dollar bloc” to follow suit, lest their currencies appreciate as investors seek higher yields."
Looser US monetary policy has thus set the tempo for inflation in a significant chunk – perhaps as much as 60% – of the global economy.
"But, with most economies in the Middle East and Asia in much stronger shape than the US and inflation already climbing sharply in most emerging-market countries, aggressive monetary stimulus is the last thing they need right now."
"The European Central Bank is staying calm for the moment, but it, too, is probably holding back on interest-rate hikes partly out of fear of driving the euro, already at record levels, even higher."
"And the ECB worries that if the US recession proves contagious, it may have to turn around and start slashing rates anyway."
So what happens next?
"If the US tips from mild recession into deep recession, the global deflationary implications will cancel out some of the inflationary pressures the world is facing."
"Global commodity prices will collapse, and prices for many goods and services will stop rising so quickly as unemployment and excess capacity grow."
"Of course, a US recession will also bring further Fed interest-rate cuts, which will exacerbate problems later."
But inflation pressures will be even worse if the US recession remains mild and global growth remains solid.
"In that case, inflation could easily rise to 1980’s (if not quite 1970’s) levels throughout much of the world."
"Until now, most investors have thought that they would rather risk high inflation for a couple of years than accept even a short and shallow recession."
"But they too easily forget the costs of high inflation, and how difficult it is to squeeze it out of the system."
"Maybe they, too, should try holding a few conferences in Zimbabwe, and get a reality check of their own."
An Intelligent War on Terror
Terrorism is an existential threat.
"In our European Security Strategy, it was deemed one of the key strategic threats facing the European Union, and to fight it we are using all instruments at our disposal, particularly in the intelligence area."
"The first objective of intelligence is to find terrorists, prevent them from acting, and track them after they do attack."
This is the kind of operational intelligence that is best done at the national level.
Many arrests and disruptions of terrorist operations in Europe result from cooperation between EU members' intelligence services.
I was recently asked by journalists whether inter-agency cooperation is sufficient and whether European mechanisms for sharing operational intelligence should be created.
"Later that very day, a joint operation resulted in simultaneous arrests in five European countries."
The operation's success was no accident.
"Last year, the Union concluded two Europol agreements, as well as an Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement."
"Europe's security services are working closely together within the Counter-Terrorist Group, and Europol's Counter-Terrorist Task Force has been re-established."
"A high-level group on border and transport security is at work, and links between member states' police chiefs are strengthening."
But widespread sharing is not always needed or appropriate.
"Member states also need intelligence derived from ongoing casework, not to inform policy, at least not directly, but to disrupt and dismantle networks and prevent attacks."
"This information is in many ways more sensitive, and services share it on a ""need to know"" basis, not for the sake of promoting cooperation."
I see another role for intelligence: to inform political action.
"Intelligence services can educate the public, explaining the origins of the alienation that underpins terrorism, how radicalization and recruitment occur, and highlight terrorists' goals, methods, and targeting strategies."
Only when we understand this can we develop appropriate and concrete policies.
For this we need good strategic assessments of intelligence.
"The EU's members have structures to provide this, and with their support and input we are building structures at a Europe-wide level, to bring this information to EU policymakers."
"Europol is performing a similar function with material derived from police work, and we are working to ensure synergy between these two efforts."
"This is a different level of intelligence, more analytical, where close collaboration adds significant value."
"In the aftermath of the Madrid bombings, the EU focused on internal aspects of the fight against terrorism. But this does not mean that the Union has become introverted."
"On the contrary, the EU regards international cooperation as fundamental in the fight against terrorism."
"Generally, counter-terrorism is very high on our international agenda and is becoming better integrated into the Union's political dialogue with other countries."
"We are better targeting our external assistance and capacity building programs, and we are ready to use our trade and economic muscle, when necessary, by demanding counter-terrorism clauses in bilateral treaties."
"There has also been a sea change in transatlantic cooperation between the EU and the US. Deeds speak louder than words, and deeds on the transatlantic level have been swift and decisive - for example, joint efforts aimed at choking off terrorist financing - even when we had strong divergences over Iraq."
"Still, I am not complacent."
"To facilitate the extremely complex task of counter-terrorism policymaking in the EU, we now have a Plan of Action, approved by the European Council, which clearly specifies who does what, and by when."
This will also help national parliaments understand EU objectives and facilitate their legislative planning.
I have recently appointed a counter-terrorism coordinator to assist me in following through on the Plan of Action.
We also have a considerable number of new instruments in the area of justice and home affairs.
"The European Arrest Warrant is already producing concrete results, and we are moving towards the ""free movement of judicial decisions"" in the EU, through which judicial decisions - such as arrest and surrender of suspects, confiscation, and freezing of assets - will be mutually recognized."
"Furthermore, the European Border Agency will become operational in 2005."
"As requested by the European Council, I am developing, in cooperation with the European Commission, a strategy to shut down terrorist financing."
"This is where the real test of cooperation lies, for our success will rely on securing the appropriate interaction and flow of intelligence between the relevant services and the financial and banking communities."
I firmly believe that the military option alone cannot defeat terror.
"Judicial, police, and intelligence cooperation should be the focal point for action."
This does not mean that we are not working on how European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) can offer a meaningful contribution.
But ESDP is not at the core of our efforts.
"Aside from security and intelligence efforts, we must also work to deny ""oxygen"" to the terrorists."
This means addressing the factors that contribute to support for and recruitment by terrorist groups.
Regional conflicts cause anger and resentment.
The unresolved Arab-Israeli problem leads to the rise of radicalism and extremism.
There is entirely too much fuel for terrorist propaganda.
The EU will be tough on terrorism. But it must also be tough on the causes of terrorism.
"These are not two fights, but one."
Argentina’s Sovereign Bondage
"WASHINGTON, DC – Sovereign debt has been back in the news recently, this time because of a United States Supreme Court ruling concerning Argentine debt."
"As a result of the ruling, a complicated issue is likely to become even more so."
Sovereign debt has been a major feature of the international financial system for centuries.
"Kings borrowed, often internationally, to finance wars and other expenditures."
"When they couldn’t pay, as sometimes happened, sovereigns defaulted."
"Today, sovereigns are more often democratically elected governments, but they still borrow."
And they still occasionally find themselves in situations in which their debt has become unsustainable and they need outside help to continue to meet their debt-service obligations.
"When private firms (or subnational governments) become insolvent, there are normally legal bankruptcy procedures to determine what to do."
"Without such procedures, a market economy would be unable to function."
"In part, this is because creditors would otherwise stop extending credit and demand repayment at the first sign of trouble. This is because the first creditors to be paid would receive the full amount owed to them, leaving less for later creditors – and thus creating an incentive for all creditors to rush for the exits even before debt servicing had become impossible."
"Moreover, in many cases, the value of the troubled entity’s assets as a going concern is greater than it would be if the assets were sold separately."
"In such cases, all creditors would be better off with a debt write-down than with dissolution."
Bankruptcy law thus protects creditors from each other by preventing an outcome that would needlessly harm all of them.
"In the case of sovereign debt, however, there is no binding international law that permits bankruptcy."
"Though some routine practices have emerged as international capital markets have grown, they remain ad hoc."
"Given the uncertainty involved, and that sovereign debtors can repay domestic-currency debt simply by printing money, creditors have typically demanded significantly higher interest rates if bonds are not issued under the law and in the currency of an advanced country – often the United States or the United Kingdom."
"When a sovereign decides that its foreign debt is unsustainable, the government and its creditors have had to negotiate among themselves about what to do."
"For sovereign bonds held by other sovereigns, the Paris Club of creditor countries has developed procedures for handling the debt."
"But when private creditors hold sovereign debt, organizing them creates a new challenge with each episode."
"When debt is unsustainable, there are several possible negotiating outcomes."
"Sometimes, debt-service payments are rescheduled and perhaps stretched out over a longer period, thus giving the debtor country time to regain its ability to pay."
"Sometimes, creditors agree to exchange the old bonds for new ones, which have either a lower face value or lower interest payments."
Few governments refuse to pay at all in any form.
Argentina defaulted on its debt in 2001.
"After several difficult years, the country managed to negotiate an exchange of outstanding bonds for bonds with a considerably lower face value."
About 93% of creditors accepted the exchange and received new bonds with a face value that was about one-quarter of that of the old bonds.
"After 2005, Argentina maintained debt service on the new bonds."
"But some creditors held out, and sued Argentina in New York (as the bonds were issued under New York law)."
Argentine bonds (like most others) had a so-called pari passu clause that committed the government to treat all bondholders alike.
"The holdouts claimed that, if the new bonds were being serviced in full (as they were), equal treatment required that the holdouts should receive the full amount owed to them (including not only interest but also principal)."
The US Second Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that Argentina was bound to honor its obligations to the holdout bondholders in the same proportion (namely 100%) as the holders of the exchange bonds.
It was that ruling that the Supreme Court recently upheld.
"Under the court order, Argentina may not pay the holders of the new bonds unless it also pays the holdouts, and no US financial institution can serve as an intermediary to make payments for Argentina."
"As a result, Argentina must either pay the holdouts in full or default on the new bonds."
"Regardless of how the current impasse is resolved, the ruling raises many questions for issuers and holders of sovereign debt."
"If creditors now believe that holding out makes it more likely that they will receive full value at a later date, restructuring sovereign debt and restoring a debtor economy’s normal functioning will be more difficult."
"Since the Argentine crisis, most new bonds have been issued with collective action clauses (CACs), under which bondholders are obliged to accept restructuring if a specified share (usually around 70%) agree to it."
"As time passes, there are fewer and fewer outstanding bonds that do not contain CACs."
"But CACs may not resolve the problem entirely, because a vote would be required for each separate bond issue, and a holdout position could be achieved by buying up the blocking percentage of a small issue."
It is also possible that language will be found in future bond issues that replaces the pari passu clause but provides sufficient assurance to bondholders to let the market function much as it did until the current ruling.
"Until the euro crisis, it was generally believed that problems servicing sovereign debt occurred only in emerging markets and the least developed countries."
"The US Supreme Court’s decision on Argentina adds a new wrinkle, and may well further increase the risk attached to holding sovereign debt – and this to the cost of issuing it."
Families of the Future
"WASHINGTON, DC – It is graduation season in many countries, a time when classes of bright and fortunate young people don their caps and gowns, receive their diplomas, and hear advice from their elders."
Some commencement speakers focus on the graduates’ accomplishments; others emphasize the career-related challenges that lie ahead.
But there is another critical aspect to success and happiness that is often overlooked during these garlanded celebrations of academic achievement: family.
"In fact, these ceremonies are about the graduates’ families – that is, those who have loved and supported them, regardless of their biological connection – as much as they are about the graduates themselves."
"Whatever each family’s experience, the result has been a child reaching a level of education of which many people can only dream."
"Beyond noting and appreciating what their families have done for them, graduates must consider the kind of family that they want to nurture."
And here they have no choice but to reflect on gender roles and relations.
"Given the vastly different expectations and experiences of men and women – depending, of course, on the cultural context – the questions that they must ask themselves vary considerably."
"The question of how to balance work and family, typically posed to young women, is actually a critical consideration for young men as well."
The traditional male role as “provider” has often led work to take precedence over time spent with family.
"Indeed, in reflecting on their childhoods, many graduates may lament that their fathers spent too little time at home, or were less nurturing than they could have been."
"Men must determine how to develop the caring side of their personality, in addition to the competitive side that will enable them to advance their careers."
"They must aim to love and give fully, not only as fathers, but also as sons, husbands, brothers, uncles, and even friends."
"To this end, they should ask their own fathers and grandfathers what they wish they had done differently – and plan accordingly."
"Instead of waiting for challenges to arise, young men should begin establishing their priorities now."
How can they ensure that their relationship with their future partner is equal?
How will they adapt to enable their partner to fulfill his or her career aspirations?
Will they be willing to move for their partner’s job?
"Would they be prepared to stop working or reduce their workload, in order to care for a child or parent?"
"Through all of this, men should remember that, by adopting a new approach, they are not abandoning their roles as providers."
"After all, providing care is every bit as important as providing cash."
The reward is the close relationship with their children that women have traditionally enjoyed.
"Women, too, must think carefully about the future that they would find most fulfilling."
"For many women, the challenge is abandoning the assumption that their work/family balance will have to tip in favor of family, that it is they who will have to sacrifice their careers."
"Of course, many women might choose to emphasize family (as would many men)."
"The point is the choice: the choice of how much energy to devote to one’s home, the choice of a career based on passion, and the choice of a genuinely equal partner."
Upholding an equal partnership of caregivers and breadwinners will require compromises on both sides.
"A woman with great career ambitions should be able to find a partner who is willing to slow down or stop working to support her, just as a man should."
But bucking gender roles works both ways.
"Indeed, for such a dynamic to work, the woman must recalibrate her expectations of her spouse."
"If she wants to build a family with a man, she must not become caught up in traditional perceptions of masculinity."
"If she is uncomfortable, say, out-earning her husband, she is limiting both partners."
"Simply put, the kind of support that young women’s fathers and grandfathers probably offered to their mothers and grandmothers is not the only kind of support a woman can or should expect from her partner."
"Her role should be determined not by old-fashioned rules, but by her individual strengths and ambitions."
And her partner should have the confidence and competence to encourage her to fulfill her potential.
"Finally, graduation does not mean that the family’s job is complete."
Parents and grandparents must continue to play a critical role in reshaping expectations – or at least supporting the choices that their children and grandchildren make.
This means accepting the decision of a son or grandson not to use his hard-earned university degree to become the primary breadwinner in his future household.
"And it means understanding that what a daughter or granddaughter needs may not be a traditional “provider,” but a partner who makes career sacrifices to enable her to advance hers."
Graduation is a day of ending and beginning.
"It is a day for young people to recall the sacrifices that their families have made for them, and consider the kinds of sacrifices they will make for their families."
"And it is a day to recognize that, if family comes first, work does not come second; rather, life comes together."
Bringing the Iran Deal Back Home
"WASHINGTON, DC – The United States government’s initial statements on the “first-step agreement on Iran’s nuclear program” have been focused, above all, on the great deal that the US and the West have gotten."
Iran has agreed to halt enrichment of uranium above 5% purity; neutralize its stockpile of uranium enriched to near 20% purity; stop building its stockpile of 3.5% enriched uranium; forswear “next generation centrifuges”; shut down its plutonium reactor; and allow extensive new inspections of its nuclear facilities.
"In return, Iran will get “limited, temporary, targeted, and reversible relief” from international sanctions."
"The agreement covers only the next six months, during which both sides will try to reach a final comprehensive agreement."
"For now, as President Barack Obama put it, the burden remains, from the US point of view, “on Iran to prove to the world that its nuclear program will be exclusively for peaceful purposes.”"
"Framing the issue this way reflects the need to sell even a limited, temporary deal to a skeptical US Congress."
"Israel’s manifest displeasure with the entire negotiating process, which Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu has emphasized to anyone who will listen over the past three months, reverberates loudly among Israel’s many congressional friends."
"Indeed, Israel’s stance bolsters the desire of Obama’s Republican opponents to paint him as weak and naïve in negotiating with Iran, a country that still describes the US as “the great Satan.”"
Both Republicans and Democrats are threatening to pass a new round of tough sanctions against Iran in December.
"Thus, Obama must focus as much on pushing back against domestic hardliners as on taking a hard line with Iranian negotiators."
This is hardly surprising.
"One hopes that the Iranian government’s announcement to its own people reads roughly the same, in reverse, focusing on the important concessions that Iranian negotiators have won."
"That includes suspension of international sanctions on Iran’s exports of oil, gold, and cars, which could yield $1.5 billion in revenue; unfreezing $4.2 billion in revenue from oil sales; and releasing tuition-assistance payments from the Iranian government to Iranian students enrolled abroad."
"Iranian President Hassan Rouhani needs to marshal support for the deal just as much as Obama does, above all by reducing inflation and getting his country’s economy moving again."
"If domestic tensions, above all within Iran’s restive middle class, ease as a result, the government will receive the credit, while the Iranian Republican Guard and other hardliners will be weakened."
"The West had better hope that the Iranian narrative proves true, because the political space for any meaningful diplomatic agreement – both the desire for a deal and the room to achieve it – is created at home."
This is particularly true when a new government comes to power with promises of improving the economy.
Rouhani can undercut hardliners who would seek to block any ultimate deal only if the Iranian population both experiences economic relief and attributes it to his administration.
"The true test of this interim agreement, therefore, is whether both sides can secure the domestic space to continue negotiating."
The stakes have never been higher – and not only because of the very real and dangerous geopolitical consequences of an Iranian bomb.
"As Obama put it, “If Iran seizes this opportunity, the Iranian people will benefit from rejoining the international community, and we can begin to chip away at the mistrust between our two nations."
This would provide Iran with a dignified path to forge a new beginning with the wider world based on mutual respect.”
"Let us imagine, just for a moment, what the Middle East and Central Asia could look like if the US and Iran could once again talk to each other."
"As we saw briefly after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the drug trade from Afghanistan could be sharply curtailed."
"Moreover, a regional agreement involving Iran, India, Pakistan, Russia, China, Turkey, the European Union, and the US would become much more likely, providing the framework for security and economic growth that diplomats from Henry Kissinger to the late Richard Holbrooke always claimed would be necessary for lasting peace in Afghanistan."
"Perhaps most important, a peace settlement in Syria would be much more likely – and more likely to endure – if the US could talk to Iran, which has far more leverage with President Bashar al-Assad’s regime than Russia does."
"After all, it was fighters from Hezbollah, Iran’s Lebanese proxy, who turned the tide of battle decisively against the opposition this past summer."
"Iran has long made clear that it wants to resume its historic position as a major regional – and indeed global – power, an ambition that can only grow stronger as it watches Turkey’s geopolitical stature rise."
"Iran and Turkey, after all, are the 17th and 18th largest countries in the world by population, respectively, with sophisticated elites and illustrious and ancient pasts."
The ultimate winner in the interim agreement with Iran is the cause of diplomacy itself.
"US Secretary of State John Kerry, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton, and the other parties to the talks – all supported by able teams of diplomats – hammered out the deal’s details over months, staying at the table, compromising, holding firm, and managing the expectations of multiple players (including the press)."
The Obama administration committed itself to global leadership through civilian rather than military power.
Post-Shutdown America
"WASHINGTON, DC – After 16 days of closed museums, half-empty federal buildings, unnaturally quiet streets, and tens of thousands of workers left in existential limbo, the lights are back on in Washington."
"But, while the shutdown of the United States government, initiated by radical congressional Republicans seeking to block implementation of President Barack Obama’s health-care legislation, is over – at least for now – three enduring lessons have emerged."
"First, the next time the eurozone crisis flares up, the US will simply have to bite its tongue; after all, the shutdown spectacle revealed pathologies no less severe than those that have characterized the European Union’s economic and political negotiations over the past five years."
Irresponsible behavior threatening the health of the global economy?
Check.
Political posturing and outlandish claims foreclosing any possibility of compromise?
Check.
Breathtaking brinkmanship and 11th-hour decision-making leaving all bystanders wondering whether this time the cart might in fact go over the cliff?
Check.
Few countries in recent years have been spared the pain of their domestic political spectacles being broadcast around the world.
The United Kingdom had mass riots in London just two summers ago; strikes and demonstrations have paralyzed Paris on a regular basis;
Greece has a rising fascist party; Mexico City has been practically shut down by teachers occupying the central square; and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan resorted to violence in June to quell weeks of protests against his increasingly autocratic ways.
"Among non-democracies, China had the Bo Xilai scandal, which was worthy of a spy novel, with illicit affairs, rampant corruption, murder, and a senior police official’s dramatic quest for asylum in a US consulate."
"Against this backdrop, the US government shutdown looks a little different."
"Yes, it was a clear symptom of deep political dysfunction, stemming from the politicized demarcation of electoral districts and the distorting effects of America’s campaign-finance system."
"Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that the entire crisis played out according to constitutional rules."
"Indeed, as the deadline for raising the debt ceiling neared, Henry Aaron, a distinguished senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, pointed out that the US Constitution requires the president “to spend what Congress has instructed him to spend, to raise only those taxes Congress has authorized him to impose, and to borrow no more than Congress authorizes.”"
"Honoring all three of those legal obligations simultaneously is impossible if Congress refuses to raise the debt ceiling, but raising the debt ceiling without Congressional approval, though illegal and an impeachable offense, was the least-bad choice."
"Even in the face of deeper political polarization than the US has seen in many decades (and, in many places, a visceral hatred of the country’s first African-American president), Americans and their politicians understand that breaking the rules means dissolving the constitutional glue that holds the polity together."
This understanding means that the cure for the current dysfunction will be found at the ballot box rather than in the streets.
And it is this collective commitment to the law governing how political power can be exercised that is the essence of liberal democracy.
But Americans are in no mood to celebrate.
"Indeed, the second conclusion to be drawn from the US government shutdown is the virtual disappearance of American triumphalism."
"Chest-thumping exceptionalism has given way to a more sober patriotism, in which ordinary citizens recognize the long-term trends eroding the promise of equal opportunity, particularly the shortcomings that beset the country’s health-care, education, and infrastructure systems."
"The anger of Tea Party Republicans (like the anger of Occupy Wall Street protesters) reflects a sense that nothing but dramatic, even revolutionary, measures can change the system."
"In response, however, more pragmatic voters are increasingly irate about political paralysis and their governing institutions’ inability to respond to the preferences of a clear majority of the population."
"In the midst of the shutdown, the Republican Party’s popular approval rating sank to barely a quarter of the national electorate, a historic low, while the approval rating for Congress as a whole stood at just 5%."
The final lesson of the shutdown is that political systems of every kind benefit from the addition of women.
Many commented on the critical role played by six women senators – Republicans and Democrats – in reaching the compromises needed to end the crisis.
"These women have maintained relationships with one another across the partisan divide, while those among their male colleagues have steadily deteriorated, giving way to competitive grandstanding and vituperation."
"Equally important, these women felt – and acted upon – the moral necessity of actually governing."
"In the words of Senator Susan Collins, a Republican from Maine who first put together the outlines of a deal and took it to the Senate floor, the shutdown “hurt all the small businesses” around Acadia National Park in her home state, “and that is plain wrong.”"
The world should note.
"Women are not necessarily better than men at governing, but they often have different perspectives and habits of engagement that can be essential for cutting through the standoffs created by the need to defend male egos."
"They are also often more focused on the plight of actual people than on the promotion of grand principles, preferring concrete progress to abstract victory."
"From parliaments to peace negotiations, adding women improves outcomes."
"The US government is back at work, for now."
Negotiations for a real budget that all sides can live with are beginning.
And assessments of how the shutdown will affect the Republican Party’s fortunes in the 2014 midterm elections are rife.
"But the country’s social and economic divisions will ultimately find political solutions, through elections and the efforts of millions of Americans to achieve fundamental reforms."
"As frustrating and embarrassing as the last several weeks have been, it could have been much worse."
Xi’s Recipe
"WASHINGTON, DC – China’s government is cracking down hard on Western journalists, threatening not to renew visas for reporters from the New York Times and Bloomberg in retaliation for their reporting on the corruption of senior Chinese officials."
"Times columnist Thomas Friedman recently penned an open letter to the Chinese government telling them that, because the top “cause of death of Chinese regimes in history is greed and corruption,” a free press is more likely to help than hurt."
"Anyone who holds freedom of the press and freedom of expression to be universal human rights will agree with Friedman’s position. But, in China, politics – including the politics of rights – is always intertwined with economics."
"Last month, President Xi Jinping announced a set of sweeping economic reforms at the Central Committee’s Third Plenum, setting forth his vision of “the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.”"
"His 60-point plan included reforms of fiscal policy and the financial sector that would set market interest rates on loans and deposits, permit some private-investor participation in state-owned enterprises, increase the role of small and medium-size enterprises, loosen labor restrictions, and introduce property taxes to boost revenue for local authorities."
"This renewed embrace of the market, reminiscent of Deng Xiaoping’s original turn to capitalism in 1979, will be hard medicine for China’s entrenched business and government elites to swallow."
If Xi’s administration is successful – a big if – its reforms may enable China to negotiate the necessary transition from an economy driven by exports and government investment to a more sustainable growth model based on domestic consumption.
The stakes are high.
A country that has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty over the last two decades must now find a way to safeguard and gradually increase those gains while engineering the same miracle for the hundreds of millions still left behind.
"The world has a significant economic, political, and moral interest in the success of China’s reform agenda."
"In this context, it is important to understand that Xi’s economic reforms are only one ingredient of a carefully crafted cocktail."
The rest of the recipe includes two parts popular social reforms – an end to the one-child policy for many Chinese parents and the abolition of “reeducation through labor” – and one part political crackdown.
"Increased censorship and intimidation of foreign journalists, together with the imprisonment of dissidents and tighter restrictions on dissent, are an effort to ensure that economic disruption does not give rise to political rebellion."
"To implement his ambitious reform agenda, Xi has taken several steps to consolidate his personal and bureaucratic power."
"He has reduced the membership of the Politburo from nine to seven, making it easier to obtain agreement in a system designed to institutionalize collective leadership."
"He has increased the power of the Central Committee, which he chairs. And he has created a new State Security Council."
"To understand how the State Security Council could serve Xi’s interest in centralizing power, consider the United States."
"Without the National Security Council and the Domestic Policy Council, the US president would have no routine way to control and coordinate different bureaucracies."
"White House staff working for the National Security Council call meetings at which officials from the State Department, Defense Department, Treasury, Justice Department, and other key agencies hash out their views on a given policy. But it is the president’s staff who guide the outcome and determines the next steps."
Xi’s moves to strengthen his hand have helped to convince observers that he means business with the reform agenda.
"Since the Third Plenum ended and the scope of Xi’s reforms has become clear, many China watchers have hailed him as the most transformative leader since Deng."
"Time will tell, but a key difference between 2014 and 1979 is that today the Chinese cocktail is spiked with fear."
"Evan Osnos, writing in The New Yorker, reports that two years ago, in the midst of the Arab uprisings, a senior official told a meeting in Beijing that if the Chinese government “waver[ed]” in the midst of social-media-fueled global dissidence, “the state could sink into the abyss.”"
